.. imported from: https://wiki.analog.com/resources/tools-software/linux-drivers/net-mac-phy/adin2111

.. _adin2111:

ADIN2111
========

ADIN2111 10BASE-T1L 2-Port Ethernet Switch Linux Driver.

Supported Devices
-----------------

- :adi:`ADIN2111`

Supported Boards
----------------

Description
-----------

The ADIN2111 is a low complexity, 2-Port Ethernet Switch with Integrated
10BASE-T1L PHYs designed for industrial Ethernet applications. It integrates an
2 Ethernet PHY cores with a MAC and all the associated analog circuitry, input
and output clock buffering.

Programmable transmit levels, external termination resistors and independent
Rx/Tx pins make the ADIN2111 suited to intrinsic safety applications. The
ADIN2111 has an integrated voltage supply monitoring and power on reset
circuitry to improve system level robustness.

The device has a 4-wire SPI interface for communication between the MAC and host
processor.

Source Code
-----------

Status
~~~~~~

.. list-table::

   * - Source
     - Mainlined?
     -
   * - :git-linux:`adin1110.c <drivers/net/ethernet/adi/adin1110.c>`
     - Yes
     -

Files
~~~~~

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Function
     - File
     -
   * - driver
     - :git-linux:`drivers/net/ethernet/adi/adin1110.c <drivers/net/ethernet/adi>`
     -

Enabling Linux driver support
-----------------------------

Configure kernel with ``make menuconfig`` (alternatively use ``make xconfig`` or
``make qconfig``)

#. Hit the search button (typically the slash ``/`` key)
#. Type ADIN1110, then hit Enter; if nothing shows up, the driver is not
   available in your kernel tree, please use
   `the ADI linux tree <https://github.com/analogdevicesinc/linux/>`__
#. Press 1 (the key), then hit Enter
#. You should see the location + dependencies for enabling the driver

::

   Linux Kernel Configuration
   Symbol: ADIN1110 [=y]
   Type  : tristate
   Prompt: Analog Devices ADIN1110 MAC-PHY
      Location:
        -> Device Drivers
          -> Network device support (NETDEVICES [=y])
            -> Ethernet driver support (ETHERNET [=y])
      (1)     -> Analog Devices devices (NET_VENDOR_ADI [=y])
      Defined at drivers/net/ethernet/adi/Kconfig:20
      Depends on: NETDEVICES [=y] && ETHERNET [=y] && NET_VENDOR_ADI [=y] && SPI [=y]
      Selects: CRC8 [=y]

Driver testing
--------------

This requires that another 10BASE-T1L PHY be connected to the other end of the
network cable, or that a media converter be used to convert to normal
twisted-pair ethernet that standard ethernet cables use.

ADIN2111 communicates with the host via SPI. For 10 Mbps bandwidth, SPI
frequency needs to be around 23 MHz. Lower SPI frequencies are supported but
will result in a lower bandwidth. At 1 MHz the MAC will provide aprox. 0.4 Mbps
of bandwidth.

Connect to host the SCLK, CS_N, SDI, SDO and INT_N. (The INT_N is mandatory, see
DT bindings). RX frames and sent TX frames are signaled to the host by INT_N IRQ
pin.

Device Tree
~~~~~~~~~~~

ADIN2111 probes via devicetree.

::

   ethernet@0 {
       compatible = "adi,adin2111";

           /* SPI CS number */
           reg = <0>;

           /* will need 23 MHz for 10 Mbps, lower speeds will result in lower bandwidth */
       spi-max-frequency = <1000000>;

           /* optional, will check all control read/writes over SPI */
       adi,spi-crc;

       #address-cells = <1>;
       #size-cells = <0>;

           /* an IRQ is required, INT_N pin is configured to signal RX/TX frames */
       interrupt-parent = <&gpio>;
       interrupts = <25 2>;

           /* This is the host MAC address, by default ADIN2111 will also accept broadcast frames */
       mac-address = [ CA 2F B7 10 23 63 ];

       phy@0 {
           compatible = "ethernet-phy-id0283.bca1";
           reg = <0x0>;
       };

       phy@1 {
           compatible = "ethernet-phy-id0283.bca1";
           reg = <0x1>;
       };
   };

Renaming ethernet interfaces
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

After ADIN2111 has probed, without any udev rule, the two interfaces will be
probably named eth1 and eth2. To rename them you need to create a udev rule
under:

::

   root@analog:~# cat /etc/udev/rules.d/55-adin2111-net.rules
   SUBSYSTEM=="net", ACTION=="add", ATTR{phys_switch_id}=="6164696e323131312d31", ATTR{phys_port_name}!="", NAME="adin2111-0-$attr{phys_port_name}"

.. important::

   You need to change the phys_switch_id to match your own system. This can be
   found under:

   ::

      root@analog:~# cat /sys/class/net/eth1/phys_switch_id
      6164696e323131312d31

Bridging the two ports
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Linux driver will allocated and register two port netdevs. In this way each port
is exposed to the userspace. Sometimes the user may not care on which port he
wants to talk to another host on the same subnet, for this the two ports can be
bridged:

::

   ip link set adin2111-0-p0 up
   ip link set adin2111-0-p1 up
   ip link add br0 type bridge
   ip link set adin2111-0-p0 master br0
   ip link set adin2111-0-p1 master br0
   ip addr add 192.168.160.160/24 dev br0
   ip link set br0 up
   ip route add 192.168.160.0/24 dev br0

.. important::

   Default behavior of ADIN2111 will be to forward to the host only frames with
   the destination MAC address of the interface and broadcast address (Multicast
   only if enabled). Other frames are not seen by the SPI host and will be
   forwarded to the other port.

Printing the forwarding database
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

::

   root@analog:~# bridge fdb
   ca:2f:b7:10:23:63 dev adin2111-0-p0 master br0 permanent
   33:33:00:00:00:01 dev adin2111-0-p0 self permanent
   01:00:5e:00:00:01 dev adin2111-0-p0 self permanent
   33:33:ff:10:23:63 dev adin2111-0-p0 self permanent
   33:33:00:00:00:fb dev adin2111-0-p0 self permanent
   33:33:00:00:00:01 dev adin2111-0-p1 self permanent
   01:00:5e:00:00:01 dev adin2111-0-p1 self permanent
   33:33:ff:10:23:63 dev adin2111-0-p1 self permanent
   33:33:00:00:00:fb dev adin2111-0-p1 self permanent

ifconfig
~~~~~~~~

This tool will display the general status of the available network interfaces.
If they’ve obtained an IP address, RX packets/errors/dropped/etc, TX
packets/errors/dropped/etc, MAC address, etc.

Typically, if both TX & RX values are incremented, it means that it is working.
Also note that there are error counters; if only the TX/RX counters increment,
something may be wrong with the network connection. Check error/dropped counters
too.

::

   root@analog:~# ifconfig
   adin2111-0-p0: flags=4099<UP,BROADCAST,MULTICAST>  mtu 1500
           inet6 fe80::c82f:b7ff:fe10:2363  prefixlen 64  scopeid 0x20<link>
           ether ca:2f:b7:10:23:63  txqueuelen 1000  (Ethernet)
           RX packets 13995  bytes 12616746 (12.0 MiB)
           RX errors 2  dropped 270  overruns 0  frame 0
           TX packets 15916  bytes 17297421 (16.4 MiB)
           TX errors 0  dropped 0 overruns 0  carrier 0  collisions 0
           device interrupt 199

   adin2111-0-p1: flags=4163<UP,BROADCAST,RUNNING,MULTICAST>  mtu 1500
           inet6 fe80::c82f:b7ff:fe10:2363  prefixlen 64  scopeid 0x20<link>
           ether ca:2f:b7:10:23:63  txqueuelen 1000  (Ethernet)
           RX packets 106283  bytes 97498793 (92.9 MiB)
           RX errors 4  dropped 1835  overruns 0  frame 0
           TX packets 119263  bytes 128953328 (122.9 MiB)
           TX errors 0  dropped 0 overruns 0  carrier 0  collisions 0
           device interrupt 199

ethtool
~~~~~~~

This tool queries the MAC & PHY via the MAC driver. The MAC driver also allows
access to the PHY registers. ethtool can be used to show & override link
settings and other parameters for the MAC & PHY.

Links for the tool:

- Official page with source code:
  https://mirrors.edge.kernel.org/pub/software/network/ethtool/
- Manual page: http://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man8/ethtool.8.html

.. tip::

   Some features of ethtool described here are available in newer versions of
   ethtool. If some of them don’t work, consider upgrading or getting a newer
   version

Example: Seeing MAC & PHY info
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

::

   root@analog:~# ethtool adin2111-0-p0
   Settings for adin2111-0-p0:
       Supported ports: [ TP    MII ]
       Supported link modes:   10baseT/Full
       Supported pause frame use: Symmetric Receive-only
       Supports auto-negotiation: Yes
       Supported FEC modes: Not reported
       Advertised link modes:  10baseT/Full
       Advertised pause frame use: No
       Advertised auto-negotiation: Yes
       Advertised FEC modes: Not reported
       Speed: Unknown!
       Duplex: Unknown! (255)
       Auto-negotiation: on
       Port: Twisted Pair
       PHYAD: 1
       Transceiver: external
       MDI-X: Unknown
       Link detected: no

   Settings for adin2111-0-p1:
       Supported ports: [ TP    MII ]
       Supported link modes:   10baseT/Full
       Supported pause frame use: Symmetric Receive-only
       Supports auto-negotiation: Yes
       Supported FEC modes: Not reported
       Advertised link modes:  10baseT/Full
       Advertised pause frame use: No
       Advertised auto-negotiation: Yes
       Advertised FEC modes: Not reported
       Link partner advertised link modes:  10baseT/Full
       Link partner advertised pause frame use: No
       Link partner advertised auto-negotiation: Yes
       Link partner advertised FEC modes: Not reported
       Speed: 10Mb/s
       Duplex: Full
       Auto-negotiation: on
       Port: Twisted Pair
       PHYAD: 2
       Transceiver: external
       MDI-X: Unknown
       Link detected: yes

Example: changing link autonegotiation
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Since the PHY can only do 10 Mbps full-duplex, the only operation possible here
is to disable auto-negotiation and set preferred/forced master/slave

::

   ethtool -s adin2111-0-p0 speed 10 duplex full master-slave forced-master
   ethtool -s adin2111-0-p0 speed 10 duplex full master-slave forced-slave
   ethtool -s adin2111-0-p0 autoneg on
   ethtool -s adin2111-0-p0 autoneg on master-slave preferred-master
   ethtool -s adin2111-0-p0 autoneg on master-slave preferred-slave
   ethtool -s adin2111-0-p0 autoneg on master-slave forced-master
   ethtool -s adin2111-0-p0 autoneg on master-slave forced-slave

Example: checking PHY statistics
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

::

   root@analog:~# ethtool --phy-statistics adin2111-0-p0
   PHY statistics:
        total_frames_error_count: 0
        total_frames_count: 13994
        length_error_frames_count: 0
        alignment_error_frames_count: 0
        symbol_error_count: 1
        oversized_frames_count: 1
        undersized_frames_count: 0
        odd_nibble_frames_count: 1
        odd_preamble_packet_count: 0
        false_carrier_events_count: 1

   root@analog:~# ethtool --phy-statistics adin2111-0-p1
   PHY statistics:
        total_frames_error_count: 0
        total_frames_count: 106261
        length_error_frames_count: 0
        alignment_error_frames_count: 0
        symbol_error_count: 0
        oversized_frames_count: 0
        undersized_frames_count: 0
        odd_nibble_frames_count: 0
        odd_preamble_packet_count: 0
        false_carrier_events_count: 0

Throughput testing - iperf
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This is a more system-general test but it also validates the PHY.

.. tip::

   More tools are available for this sort of testing (iperf3, netperf, etc), but
   iperf is one of the more basic/simple ones to do this validation. If this one
   achieves expected results, others should too

On one of the endpoints with the ADIN1100, run:

::

   iperf -s

and on another system

::

   iperf -c <ip-addr-of-the-other-system>

Then reverse the commands on the hosts. iperf only works in one direction.

Data integrity testing
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

One one side, generate a file with random data (say 1GB)

::

   dd if=/dev/urandom of=test.data bs=1M count=1000

   sha256sum test.data
   <SHA256-hash-of-data>

Then transfer the data to the other side with scp,ftp,etc:

::

   scp test.data root@<ip-addr-of-the-other-host>

On the other host check the hash

::

   sha256sum test.data
   <SHA256-hash-of-data> == should be identical with the first hash

Ethernet pointers
-----------------

- netdev mailing list: netdev@vger.kernel.org
- `Ethernet Controller bindings doc <https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/tree/Documentation/devicetree/bindings/net/ethernet-controller.yaml>`__
- `Ethernet PHY bindings doc <https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/tree/Documentation/devicetree/bindings/net/ethernet-phy.yaml>`__

.. include:: /include/need-help.rst
   :start-after: .. start-need-help
   :end-before: .. end-need-help
