.. imported from: https://wiki.analog.com/resources/tools-software/linux-drivers/mux/adgs1408

.. _adgs1408:

ADGS1408
========

ADGS1408/ADGS1409 8:1/Dual 4:1 Muxes Linux Driver.

Supported Devices
-----------------

- :adi:`ADGS1408`
- :adi:`ADGS1409`

Evaluation Boards
-----------------

- :adi:`EVAL-ADGS1408SDZ`

Description
-----------

This is a mux controller subsystem driver, with an interface for accessing mux
controllers. This is done in such a way that several consumers can independently
access the same mux controller if one controller controls several multiplexers,
thus allowing sharing.

Source Code
-----------

Status
~~~~~~

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Source
     - Mainlined?
     -
   * - :git-linux:`git <rpi-4.14.y:drivers/mux/adgs140x.c>`
     - [No]
     -

Files
~~~~~

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Function
     - File
     -
   * - driver
     - :git-linux:`rpi-4.14.y:drivers/mux/adgs140x.c`
     -

Devicetree
~~~~~~~~~~

Required devicetree properties:

- compatible: Needs to be the name of the device. E.g. ``adi,adgs1408``
- reg: The chipselect number used for the device
- spi-max-frequency: Maximum SPI clock frequency.
- #mux-control-cells:is required to be <0>

::

   &spi0 {
       pinctrl-names = "default";
       pinctrl-0 = <&spi0_pins &spi0_cs_pins>;
       cs-gpios = <&gpio 8 1>, <&gpio 7 1>;
       status = "okay";

           mux: mux-controller@2 {
           compatible = "adi,adgs1408";
           reg = <0>;
           spi-max-frequency = <1000000>;
           #mux-control-cells = <0>;
       };
   }

   / {
       adc-mux@3 {
           compatible = "io-channel-mux";
           io-channels = <&adc 1>;
           io-channel-names = "parent";
           mux-controls = <&mux>;

           channels = "out_a0", "out_a1", "test0", "test1",
               "out_b0", "out_b1", "testb0", "testb1";

       };
   }

A consumer must also be provided to be able to control the mux. In this example
we used a regular IIO ADC driver. Which is interfaced with the IIO mux
controller consumer.

::

   adc: ad7298@3 {
       compatible = "ad7298";
       #io-channel-cells = <1>;
       spi-max-frequency = <1000000>;
       reg = <1>;
   };

The mux controller extends the ADC’s IO channel that is selected. In this case
the selected channels is represented by :

::

   io-channels = <&adc 1>;

in this case voltage0 from ad7298 is the channels multiplexed in IIO.

Adding Linux driver support
---------------------------

Configure kernel with ``make menuconfig`` (alternatively use ``make xconfig`` or
``make qconfig``)

.. note::

   If the multiplexer is used to select a signal that is fed to an IIO device,
   then you must enable IIO multiplexer driver

::

   Linux Kernel Configuration
       Device Drivers  --->
           ...
           <*>     Industrial I/O support --->
               ...
               Multiplexers --->
                   <*> IIO multiplexer driver
               ...
           --- Industrial I/O support
           Multiplexer drivers --->
               ...
               <*> Analog Devices ADGS1408/ADGS1409 Multiplexers
               ...
           ...

Hardware configuration
----------------------

Driver testing
--------------

Since we are using an IIO ADC (AD7298) then our mux will have an IIO device
folder in /sys/bus/iio/devices/iio:deviceX with the name adc-mux@3.

.. include:: /include/iio-snippets.rst
   :start-after: .. start-iio-device-files
   :end-before: .. end-iio-device-files

::

   root@raspberrypi:/sys/bus/iio/devices/iio:device1# ls -l
   total 0
   -r--r--r-- 1 root root 4096 Jul 17 13:21 dev
   -rw-r--r-- 1 root root 4096 Jul 17 13:21 in_voltage0_raw
   -rw-r--r-- 1 root root 4096 Jul 17 13:21 in_voltage0_scale
   -rw-r--r-- 1 root root 4096 Jul 17 13:21 in_voltage1_raw
   -rw-r--r-- 1 root root 4096 Jul 17 13:21 in_voltage1_scale
   -rw-r--r-- 1 root root 4096 Jul 17 13:21 in_voltage2_raw
   -rw-r--r-- 1 root root 4096 Jul 17 13:21 in_voltage2_scale
   -rw-r--r-- 1 root root 4096 Jul 17 13:21 in_voltage3_raw
   -rw-r--r-- 1 root root 4096 Jul 17 13:21 in_voltage3_scale
   -rw-r--r-- 1 root root 4096 Jul 17 13:21 in_voltage4_raw
   -rw-r--r-- 1 root root 4096 Jul 17 13:21 in_voltage4_scale
   -rw-r--r-- 1 root root 4096 Jul 17 13:21 in_voltage5_raw
   -rw-r--r-- 1 root root 4096 Jul 17 13:21 in_voltage5_scale
   -rw-r--r-- 1 root root 4096 Jul 17 13:21 in_voltage6_raw
   -rw-r--r-- 1 root root 4096 Jul 17 13:21 in_voltage6_scale
   -rw-r--r-- 1 root root 4096 Jul 17 13:21 in_voltage7_raw
   -rw-r--r-- 1 root root 4096 Jul 17 13:21 in_voltage7_scale
   -r--r--r-- 1 root root 4096 Jul 17 13:21 name
   lrwxrwxrwx 1 root root    0 Jul 17 13:21 of_node -> ../../../../firmware/devicetree/base/adc-mux@3
   drwxr-xr-x 2 root root    0 Jul 17 13:21 power
   lrwxrwxrwx 1 root root    0 Jul 17 13:21 subsystem -> ../../../../bus/iio
   -rw-r--r-- 1 root root 4096 Jul 17 13:21 uevent

Show device name
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

::

   root@raspberrypi:/sys/bus/iio/devices/iio:device1# cat name
   adc-mux@3

Get Voltage on channel Y
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

| **Description:**
| /sys/bus/iio/devices/iio:deviceX/in_voltageY_raw

This will select channel Y of the multiplexer and feed it to the input channel
of the ADC that is physically connected to the mux.

::

   root@raspberrypi:/sys/bus/iio/devices/iio:device1# cat in_voltage0_raw
   4095

The other attributes correspond to the ADC and can be viewed from here.

More Information
----------------

.. include:: /include/iio-snippets.rst
   :start-after: .. start-iio-pointers
   :end-before: .. end-iio-pointers
