Kernel driver adt7410
=====================

Supported chips:

  * Analog Devices ADT7410

    Prefix: 'adt7410'

    Addresses scanned: None

    Datasheet: Publicly available at the Analog Devices website

	       https://www.analog.com/static/imported-files/data_sheets/ADT7410.pdf
  * Analog Devices ADT7420

    Prefix: 'adt7420'

    Addresses scanned: None

    Datasheet: Publicly available at the Analog Devices website

	       https://www.analog.com/static/imported-files/data_sheets/ADT7420.pdf

  * Analog Devices ADT7422

    Prefix: 'adt7422'

    Addresses scanned: None

    Datasheet: Publicly available at the Analog Devices website

	       http://www.analog.com/static/imported-files/data_sheets/ADT7422.pdf

  * Analog Devices ADT7310

    Prefix: 'adt7310'

    Addresses scanned: None

    Datasheet: Publicly available at the Analog Devices website

	       https://www.analog.com/static/imported-files/data_sheets/ADT7310.pdf

  * Analog Devices ADT7320

    Prefix: 'adt7320'

    Addresses scanned: None

    Datasheet: Publicly available at the Analog Devices website

	       https://www.analog.com/static/imported-files/data_sheets/ADT7320.pdf

Author: Hartmut Knaack <knaack.h@gmx.de>

Description
-----------

The ADT7310, AD7320, ADT7410, ADT7420, and ADT7422 are register-compatible
temperature sensors.

The ADT7310 and ADT7320 use SPI, while the ADT7410, ADT7420 and ADT7422 use I2C.

They have a rated temperature range of -55°C to +150°C, a high accuracy
(+/-0.5°C for the ADT7310 and ADT7410, +/-0.2°C for the ADT7320 and ADT7420,
+/-0.1°C for the ADT7422), and can be operated at a resolution of 13 bits
(0.0625°C) or 16 bits (0.0078°C).

The sensors provide an INT pin to indicate that a minimum or maximum temperature
set point has been exceeded, as well as a critical temperature (CT) pin to
indicate that the critical temperature set point has been exceeded.
Both pins can be set up with a common hysteresis of 0°C - 15°C and a fault
queue, ranging from 1 to 4 events. Both pins can individually set to be
active-low or active-high, while the whole device can either run in comparator
mode or interrupt mode. The sensors support continuous temperature sampling, as
well as sampling one temperature value per second or even just get one sample on
demand for power saving. Besides, they can completely power down their ADC,
if power management is required.

Configuration Notes
-------------------

Since the device uses one hysteresis value, which is an offset to minimum,
maximum and critical temperature, it can only be set for temp#_max_hyst.
However, temp#_min_hyst and temp#_crit_hyst show their corresponding
hysteresis.
The device is set to 16 bit resolution and comparator mode.

sysfs-Interface
---------------

======================== ====================================================
temp#_input		 temperature input
temp#_min		 temperature minimum setpoint
temp#_max		 temperature maximum setpoint
temp#_crit		 critical temperature setpoint
temp#_min_hyst		 hysteresis for temperature minimum (read-only)
temp#_max_hyst		 hysteresis for temperature maximum (read/write)
temp#_crit_hyst		 hysteresis for critical temperature (read-only)
temp#_min_alarm		 temperature minimum alarm flag
temp#_max_alarm		 temperature maximum alarm flag
temp#_crit_alarm	 critical temperature alarm flag
======================== ====================================================
