.. SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-2.0

Kernel driver lt7170
=====================

Supported chips:

	* Analog Devices LT7170

		Prefix: 'lt7170'

		Addresses scanned: I2C 0x4F

		Datasheet: https://www.analog.com/media/en/technical-documentation/data-sheets/lt7170-lt7170-1.pdf

	* Analog Devices LT7170-1

		Prefix: 'lt7170-1'

		Addresses scanned: I2C 0x4F

		Datasheet: https://www.analog.com/media/en/technical-documentation/data-sheets/lt7170-lt7170-1.pdf

	* Analog Devices LT7171

		Prefix: 'lt7171'

		Addresses scanned: I2C 0x41

		Datasheet: https://www.analog.com/media/en/technical-documentation/data-sheets/lt7170-lt7170-1.pdf

        * Analog Devices LT7171-1

		Prefix: 'lt7171-1'

		Addresses scanned: I2C 0x41

		Datasheet: https://www.analog.com/media/en/technical-documentation/data-sheets/lt7170-lt7170-1.pdf


Authors:
		- Cherrence Sarip <cherrence.sarip@analog.com>


Description
-----------

The LT7170 is a family of silent switcher step-down regulators with
digital power system management support. LT7170
features telemetry monitoring of input/output voltage, output current,
and temperature over PMBus.

The driver is a client driver to the core PMBus driver. Please see
Documentation/hwmon/pmbus.rst for details on PMBus client drivers.

Usage Notes
-----------

This driver does not auto-detect devices. You will have to instantiate the
devices explicitly. Please see Documentation/i2c/instantiating-devices.rst for
details.

Platform data support
---------------------

The driver supports standard PMBus driver platform data. Please see
Documentation/hwmon/pmbus.rst for details.

Sysfs Attributes
----------------

======================= ===========================
curr1_label		"iout1"
curr1_input		Measured output current
curr1_highest		Highest measured output current
curr1_max		Maximum output current
curr1_max_alarm		Output current high alarm

in1_label		"vin"
in1_input		Measured input voltage
in1_highest		Highest measured input voltage
in1_min			Minimum input voltage
in1_min_alarm		Input voltage low alarm
in1_rated_min		Rated minimum input voltage
in1_rated_max		Rated maximum input voltage
in1_reset_history	Write to reset history for all attributes

in2_label		"vout1"
in2_input		Measured output voltage
in2_highest		Highest measured output voltage
in2_lcrit		Critical minimum output voltage
in2_lcrit_alarm		Output voltage critical low alarm
in2_min			Minimum output voltage
in2_max_alarm		Output voltage low alarm
in2_max			Maximum output voltage
in2_max_alarm		Output voltage high alarm
in2_crit		Critical maximum output voltage
in2_crit_alarm		Output voltage critical high alarm
in2_rated_min		Rated minimum output voltage
in2_rated_max		Rated maximum output voltage

temp1_input		Measured temperature
temp1_highest		Highest measured temperature
temp1_crit		Critical high temperature
temp1_crit_alarm	Chip temperature critical high alarm
temp1_max		Maximum temperature
temp1_max_alarm		Chip temperature high alarm
======================= ===========================


