.. SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-2.0

Kernel driver ltp8800
=====================

Supported chips:

	* Analog Devices LTP8800-1A

		Prefix: 'ltp8800-1a'

		Addresses scanned: I2C 0x40 - 0x4F

		Datasheet: https://www.analog.com/media/en/technical-documentation/data-sheets/ltp8800-1a.pdf

	* Analog Devices LTP8800-4A

		Prefix: 'ltp8800-4a'

		Addresses scanned: I2C 0x40 - 0x4F

		Datasheet: https://www.analog.com/media/en/technical-documentation/data-sheets/ltp8800-4a.pdf

	* Analog Devices LTP8800-2

		Prefix: 'ltp8800-2'

		Addresses scanned: I2C 0x40 - 0x4F

		Datasheet: https://www.analog.com/media/en/technical-documentation/data-sheets/ltp8800-2.pdf

Authors:
		- Cedric Encarnacion <cedricjustine.encarnacion@analog.com>


Description
-----------

The LTP8800 is a family of step-down μModule regulators that provides
microprocessor core voltage from 54V power distribution architecture. LTP8800
features telemetry monitoring of input/output voltage, input current, output
power, and temperature over PMBus.

The driver is a client driver to the core PMBus driver. Please see
Documentation/hwmon/pmbus.rst for details on PMBus client drivers.

Usage Notes
-----------

This driver does not auto-detect devices. You will have to instantiate the
devices explicitly. Please see Documentation/i2c/instantiating-devices.rst for
details.

Platform data support
---------------------

The driver supports standard PMBus driver platform data. Please see
Documentation/hwmon/pmbus.rst for details.

Sysfs Attributes
----------------

======================= ===========================
curr1_label		"iin"
curr1_input		Measured input current
curr1_crit		Critical maximum current
curr1_crit_alarm	Current critical high alarm

curr2_label		"iout1"
curr2_input		Measured output current
curr2_lcrit		Critical minimum current
curr2_crit		Critical maximum current
curr2_max		Maximum output current
curr2_alarm		Current alarm

in1_label		"vin"
in1_input		Measured input voltage
in1_lcrit		Critical minimum input voltage
in1_lcrit_alarm		Input voltage critical low alarm
in1_crit		Critical maximum input voltage
in1_crit_alarm		Input voltage critical high alarm

in2_label		"vout1"
in2_input		Measured output voltage
in2_lcrit		Critical minimum output voltage
in2_lcrit_alarm		Output voltage critical low alarm
in2_crit		Critical maximum output voltage
in2_crit_alarm		Output voltage critical high alarm
in2_max			Maximum output voltage
in2_max_alarm		Output voltage high alarm
in2_min			Minimum output voltage
in2_min_alarm		Output voltage low alarm

power1_label		"pout1"
power1_input		Measured output power
power1_crit		Critical maximum output power

temp1_input		Measured temperature
temp1_lcrit		Critical low temperature
temp1_lcrit_alarm		Chip temperature critical low alarm
temp1_crit		Critical high temperature
temp1_crit_alarm		Chiptemperature critical high alarm
======================= ===========================
