.. SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-2.0-or-later

Kernel driver lx1308
====================

Supported chips:

  * Luxshare LX1308

    Prefixes: 'lx1308'

    Addresses scanned: -

    Datasheet: Datasheet is not publicly available.

Author: Brian Chiang <chiang.brian@inventec.com>


Description
-----------

The LX1308 is a high-efficiency, non-isolated, regulated 12V, 860W,
digital DC/DC power module. The module operates from a 40V to 60V DC
primary bus and provides a 12V regulated output voltage. It can deliver
up to 860W continuous and 1300W in transient.

The module has slow OCP and fast OCP. If the module output current is higher
than slow OCP set point and the lasting time is also longer than the delay,
the module will shut down and retry 3 time, if the fault still exists then
module enter latch mode.

If the module output current is higher than fast OCP set point then it shut
down and enter latch mode.

The driver is a client driver to the core PMBus driver.
Please see Documentation/hwmon/pmbus.rst for details on PMBus client drivers.


Usage Notes
-----------

This driver does not auto-detect devices. You will have to instantiate the
devices explicitly. Please see Documentation/i2c/instantiating-devices.rst for
details.


Sysfs entries
-------------

======================= ======================================================
curr1_alarm             Input current alarm
curr1_input             Input current (IIN)
curr1_label             "iin"
curr2_crit              Output over current fault threshold (slow OCP, 60ms delay)
curr2_crit_alarm        Output over current fault alarm
curr2_input             Output current (IOUT)
curr2_label             "iout1"
curr2_max               Output over current warning threshold (slow OCP, 60ms delay)
curr2_max_alarm         Output over current warning alarm
in1_crit                Input over voltage fault threshold
in1_crit_alarm          Input over voltage fault alarm
in1_input               Input voltage (VIN)
in1_label               "vin"
in1_lcrit               Input under voltage fault threshold
in1_lcrit_alarm         Input under voltage fault alarm
in1_max                 Input over voltage warning threshold
in1_max_alarm           Input over voltage warning alarm
in1_min                 Input under voltage warning threshold
in1_min_alarm           Input under voltage warning alarm
in2_crit                Output over voltage fault threshold
in2_crit_alarm          Output over voltage fault alarm
in2_input               Output voltage (VOUT)
in2_label               "vout1"
in2_lcrit               Output under voltage fault threshold
in2_lcrit_alarm         Output under voltage fault alarm
in2_max                 Output over voltage warning threshold
in2_max_alarm           Output over voltage warning alarm
in2_min                 Output under voltage warning threshold
in2_min_alarm           Output under voltage warning alarm
power1_alarm            Input power alarm
power1_input            Input power (PIN)
power1_label            "pin"
power2_input            Output power (POUT)
power2_label            "pout1"
temp1_crit              Over temperature fault threshold
temp1_crit_alarm        Over temperature fault alarm
temp1_input             Module hot spot temperature
temp1_max               Over temperature warning threshold
temp1_max_alarm         Over temperature warning alarm
======================= ======================================================
