.. imported from: https://wiki.analog.com/resources/tools-software/linux-drivers/iio-adc/ad9083

.. _ad9083:

AD9083
======

AD9083 Linux Driver.

Supported Devices
-----------------

- :adi:`AD9083`

Supported Boards
----------------

- :adi:`EVAL-AD9083`

Supported HDL Cores
-------------------

- :dokuwiki:`AD9083 FMC Card HDL Reference Design </resources/eval/user-guides/ad9083/ad9083_evb_reference_hdl>`

Description
-----------

The AD9083 is a 16-channel, 125 MHz bandwidth, continuous time Σ-Δ (CTSD) ADC.
The device features an on-chip, programmable, single-pole antialiasing filter
and termination resistor that is designed for low power, small size, and ease of
use. The 16 ADC cores features a first-order, CTSD modulator architecture with
integrated, background nonlinearity correction logic and self cancelling dither.
Each ADC features wide bandwidth inputs supporting a variety of user-selectable
input ranges. An integrated voltage reference eases design considerations. The
analog input and clock signals are differential inputs. Each ADC has a signal
processing tile to filter out of band shaped noise from the Σ-Δ ADC and reduce
the sample rate. Each tile contains a cascaded integrator comb (CIC) filter, a
quadrature digital downconverter (DDC) with multiple finite input response (FIR)
decimation filters (decimate by J block), or up to three quadrature DDC channels
with averaging decimation filters for data gating applications. Users can
configure the Subclass 1 JESD204B based, high speed serialized output in a
variety of lane configurations (up to four), depending on the DDC configuration
and the acceptable lane rate of the receiving logic device. Multiple device
synchronization is supported through the SYSREF±, TRIG±, and SYNCINB± input
pins. The AD9083 has flexible power-down options that allow significant power
savings when desired. All of these features can be programmed using a 1.8 V
capable 3-wire serial port interface (SPI). The AD9083 is available in a
Pb-free, 100-ball CSP_BGA and is specified over the −40°C to +85°C industrial
temperature range.

Source Code
-----------

Files
~~~~~

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Function
     - File
     -
   * - driver
     - :git-linux:`drivers/iio/adc/ad9083.c`
     -
   * - API driver
     - :git-linux:`drivers/iio/adc/ad9083`
     -

Example device trees
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Function
     - File
     -
   * - dtsi
     - :git-linux:`adi-ad9083-fmc-ebz.dtsi <arch/arm64/boot/dts/xilinx/adi-ad9083-fmc-ebz.dtsi>`
     -
   * - dts
     - :git-linux:`zynqmp-zcu102-rev10-ad9083-fmc-ebz.dts <arch/arm64/boot/dts/xilinx/zynqmp-zcu102-rev10-ad9083-fmc-ebz.dts>`
     -
   * - Documentation
     - :git-linux:`adi,ad9083.yaml <Documentation/devicetree/bindings/iio/adc/adi,ad9083.yaml>`
     -

Interrelated Device Drivers
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

- :ref:`jesd204-fsm-framework`
- :external+hdl:ref:`jesd204`

Transport Layer Receive AXI-ADC driver
''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Function
     - File
     -
   * - driver
     - :git-linux:`drivers/iio/adc/cf_axi_adc_core.c`
     -
   * - driver
     - :git-linux:`drivers/iio/adc/cf_axi_adc_ring_stream.c`
     -
   * - include
     - :git-linux:`drivers/iio/adc/cf_axi_adc.h`
     -

**Documentation:** :ref:`axi-adc-hdl`

Link Layer AXI JESD204B HDL driver
''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Function
     - File
     -
   * - driver
     - :git-linux:`drivers/iio/jesd204/axi_jesd204_rx.c`
     -
   * - driver
     - :git-linux:`drivers/iio/jesd204/axi_jesd204_tx.c`
     -

**Documentation:**

- :ref:`axi_jesd204_tx`
- :ref:`axi_jesd204_rx`

PHY Layer AXI JESD204B GT (Gigabit Tranceiver) HDL driver (XILINX/ALTERA-INTEL)
'''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Function
     - File
     -
   * - driver
     - :git-linux:`drivers/iio/jesd204/axi_adxcvr.c`
     -

**Documentation:**

- :ref:`axi_adxcvr`

Enabling Linux driver support
-----------------------------

Configure kernel with ``make menuconfig`` (alternatively use ``make xconfig`` or
``make qconfig``)

.. note::

   The AD9083 driver depends on **CONFIG_SPI**

Adding Linux driver support
---------------------------

Configure kernel with ``make menuconfig`` (alternatively use ``make xconfig`` or
``make qconfig``)

::

   Linux Kernel Configuration
       Device Drivers  --->
       <*>     Industrial I/O support --->
           --- Industrial I/O support
           -*-   Enable ring buffer support within IIO
           -*-     Industrial I/O lock free software ring
           -*-   Enable triggered sampling support

                 *** Direct Digital Synthesis ***
           [--snip--]

           <*>   Analog Devices CoreFPGA AXI DDS driver
           <*>   Analog Devices AD9083 16-Channel, 125 MHz Bandwidth, JESD204B ADC

           [--snip--]

Device Tree Example
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. code:: dts

   #include <dt-bindings/iio/adc/adi,ad9083.h>
   &spi0 {
       adc0_ad9083: ad9083@0 {
           compatible = "adi,ad9083";
           reg = <0>;

           jesd204-device;
           #jesd204-cells = <2>;
           jesd204-top-device = <0>;
           jesd204-link-ids = <0>;
           jesd204-inputs = <&axi_ad9083_core_rx 0 0>;

           spi-max-frequency = <1000000>;
           clocks = <&ad9528 13>;
           clock-names = "adc_ref_clk";
           adi,adc-frequency-hz= /bits/ 64 <2000000000>; /* 2 GHz */

           /* adi_ad9083 config */

           adi,vmax-microvolt = <1800>;
           adi,fc-hz =  /bits/ 64 <800000000>;
           adi,rterm-ohms = <100>;
           adi,backoff = <0>;
           adi,finmax-hz = /bits/ 64 <100000000>;
           adi,nco0_freq-hz = /bits/ 64 <0>;
           adi,nco1_freq-hz = /bits/ 64 <0>;
           adi,nco2_freq-hz = /bits/ 64 <0>;
           adi,cic_decimation = /bits/ 8 <AD9083_CIC_DEC_4>;
           adi,j_decimation = /bits/ 8 <AD9083_J_DEC_4>;
           adi,g_decimation = /bits/ 8 <0>;
           adi,h_decimation = /bits/ 8 <0>;
           adi,nco0_datapath_mode = /bits/ 8 <AD9083_DATAPATH_ADC_CIC_J>;

           /* JESD204 parameters */

           adi,octets-per-frame = <8>;
           adi,frames-per-multiframe = <32>;
           adi,converter-resolution = <16>;
           adi,bits-per-sample = <16>;
           adi,converters-per-device = <16>;
           adi,control-bits-per-sample = <0>;
           adi,lanes-per-device = <4>;
           adi,subclass = <0>;
       };
   };

Driver testing
--------------

In case the driver probes successfully and the device gets instantiated. Your
systems kernel messages should include some line, which may look like the one
shown below.

::

   [    8.404405] ad9083 spi1.0: AD9083 Rev. 1 Grade 0 (API 1.0.1) probed

.. include:: /include/iio-snippets.rst
   :start-after: .. start-iio-device-files
   :end-before: .. end-iio-device-files

::

   root@analog:/sys/bus/iio/devices# ls
   iio:device0  iio:device1  iio:device2  iio_sysfs_trigger

   root@analog:/sys/bus/iio/devices# cd iio:device2
   root@analog:/sys/bus/iio/devices/iio:device2# cat name
   axi-ad9083-rx-hpc
   root@analog:/sys/bus/iio/devices/iio:device2# ls -l
   total 0
   drwxr-xr-x 2 root root    0 Jun 23 08:02 buffer
   -r--r--r-- 1 root root 4096 Jun 23 08:02 dev
   -rw-r--r-- 1 root root 4096 Jun 23 08:02 jesd204_fsm_ctrl
   -r--r--r-- 1 root root 4096 Jun 23 08:02 jesd204_fsm_error
   -r--r--r-- 1 root root 4096 Jun 23 08:02 jesd204_fsm_paused
   --w------- 1 root root 4096 Jun 23 08:02 jesd204_fsm_resume
   -r--r--r-- 1 root root 4096 Jun 23 08:02 jesd204_fsm_state
   -r--r--r-- 1 root root 4096 Jun 23 08:02 name
   lrwxrwxrwx 1 root root    0 Jun 23 08:02 of_node -> ../../../../../firmware/devicetree/base/fpga-axi0
   drwxr-xr-x 2 root root    0 Jun 23 08:02 power
   drwxr-xr-x 2 root root    0 Jun 23 08:02 scan_elements
   lrwxrwxrwx 1 root root    0 Jun 23 08:02 subsystem -> ../../../../../bus/iio
   -rw-r--r-- 1 root root 4096 Jun 23 08:02 uevent

Low level register access via debugfs (direct_reg_access)
---------------------------------------------------------

Some IIO drivers feature an optional debug facility, allowing users to read or
write registers directly. Special care needs to be taken when using this
feature, since you can modify registers on the back of the driver. Accessing
debugfs requires root privileges.

In order to identify if the IIO device in question feature this option you first
need to identify the IIO device number.

Therefore read the name attribute of each IIO device

::

   root@analog:/sys/bus/iio/devices# ls
   iio:device0  iio:device1  iio:device2  iio_sysfs_trigger
   root@analog:/sys/bus/iio/devices# cd iio:device2
   root@analog:/sys/bus/iio/devices/iio:device2# cat name
   axi-ad9083-rx-hpc

Change directory to /sys/kernel/debug/iio/iio:deviceX and check if the
direct_reg_access file exists.

::

   root@analog:~# cd /sys/kernel/debug/iio/iio\:device2/
   root@analog:/sys/kernel/debug/iio/iio:device2# ls direct_reg_access
   ls direct_reg_access
   root@analog:/sys/kernel/debug/iio/iio:device2#

Reading

::

   root@analog:/sys/kernel/debug/iio/iio:device2# echo 0x0 > direct_reg_access

   root@analog:/sys/kernel/debug/iio/iio:device2# cat direct_reg_access
   0xAD
   root@analog:/sys/kernel/debug/iio/iio:device2#

Writing

Write ADDRESS VALUE

::

   root@analog:/sys/kernel/debug/iio/iio:device2# echo 0x3D 0x80 > direct_reg_access
   root@analog:/sys/kernel/debug/iio/iio:device2# cat direct_reg_access
   0x80
   root@analog:/sys/kernel/debug/iio/iio:device2#

More Information
----------------

.. include:: /include/iio-snippets.rst
   :start-after: .. start-iio-pointers
   :end-before: .. end-iio-pointers
