.. SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-2.0

==================
Intel IPU6 Driver
==================

Author: Bingbu Cao <bingbu.cao@intel.com>

Overview
=========

Intel IPU6 is the sixth generation of Intel Image Processing Unit used in some
Intel Chipsets such as Tiger Lake, Jasper Lake, Alder Lake, Raptor Lake and
Meteor Lake. IPU6 consists of two major systems: Input System (ISYS) and
Processing System (PSYS). IPU6 are visible on the PCI bus as a single device, it
can be found by ``lspci``:

``0000:00:05.0 Multimedia controller: Intel Corporation Device xxxx (rev xx)``

IPU6 has a 16 MB BAR in PCI configuration Space for MMIO registers which is
visible for driver.

Buttress
=========

The IPU6 is connecting to the system fabric with Buttress which is enabling host
driver to control the IPU6, it also allows IPU6 access the system memory to
store and load frame pixel streams and any other metadata.

Buttress mainly manages several system functionalities: power management,
interrupt handling, firmware authentication and global timer sync.

ISYS and PSYS Power flow
------------------------

IPU6 driver initialize the ISYS and PSYS power up or down request by setting the
Buttress frequency control register for ISYS and PSYS
(``IPU6_BUTTRESS_REG_IS_FREQ_CTL`` and ``IPU6_BUTTRESS_REG_PS_FREQ_CTL``) in
function:

.. c:function:: int ipu6_buttress_power(...)

Buttress forwards the request to Punit, after Punit execute the power up flow,
Buttress indicates driver that ISYS or PSYS is powered up by updating the power
status registers.

.. Note:: ISYS power up needs take place prior to PSYS power up, ISYS power down
	  needs take place after PSYS power down due to hardware limitation.

Interrupt
---------

IPU6 interrupt can be generated as MSI or INTA, interrupt will be triggered when
ISYS, PSYS, Buttress event or error happen, driver can get the interrupt cause
by reading the interrupt status register ``BUTTRESS_REG_ISR_STATUS``, driver
clears the irq status and then calls specific ISYS or PSYS irq handler.

.. c:function:: irqreturn_t ipu6_buttress_isr(int irq, ...)

Security and firmware authentication
-------------------------------------

To address the IPU6 firmware security concerns, the IPU6 firmware needs to
undergo an authentication process before it is allowed to executed on the IPU6
internal processors. The IPU6 driver will work with Converged Security Engine
(CSE) to complete authentication process. The CSE is responsible of
authenticating the IPU6 firmware. The authenticated firmware binary is copied
into an isolated memory region. Firmware authentication process is implemented
by CSE following an IPC handshake with the IPU6 driver. There are some Buttress
registers used by the CSE and the IPU6 driver to communicate with each other via
IPC.

.. c:function:: int ipu6_buttress_authenticate(...)

Global timer sync
-----------------

The IPU6 driver initiates a Hammock Harbor synchronization flow each time it
starts camera operation. The IPU6 will synchronizes an internal counter in the
Buttress with a copy of the SoC time, this counter maintains the up-to-date time
until camera operation is stopped. The IPU6 driver can use this time counter to
calibrate the timestamp based on the timestamp in response event from firmware.

.. c:function:: int ipu6_buttress_start_tsc_sync(...)

DMA and MMU
============

The IPU6 has its own scalar processor where the firmware run at and an internal
32-bit virtual address space. The IPU6 has MMU address translation hardware to
allow that scalar processors to access the internal memory and external system
memory through IPU6 virtual address. The address translation is based on two
levels of page lookup tables stored in system memory which are maintained by the
IPU6 driver. The IPU6 driver sets the level-1 page table base address to MMU
register and allows MMU to perform page table lookups.

The IPU6 driver exports its own DMA operations. The IPU6 driver will update the
page table entries for each DMA operation and invalidate the MMU TLB after each
unmap and free.

.. code-block:: none

    const struct dma_map_ops ipu6_dma_ops = {
	   .alloc = ipu6_dma_alloc,
	   .free = ipu6_dma_free,
	   .mmap = ipu6_dma_mmap,
	   .map_sg = ipu6_dma_map_sg,
	   .unmap_sg = ipu6_dma_unmap_sg,
	   ...
    };

.. Note:: IPU6 MMU works behind IOMMU so for each IPU6 DMA ops, driver will call
	  generic PCI DMA ops to ask IOMMU to do the additional mapping if VT-d
	  enabled.

Firmware file format
====================

The IPU6 firmware is in Code Partition Directory (CPD) file format. The CPD
firmware contains a CPD header, several CPD entries and components. The CPD
component includes 3 entries - manifest, metadata and module data. Manifest and
metadata are defined by CSE and used by CSE for authentication. Module data is
specific to IPU6 which holds the binary data of firmware called package
directory. The IPU6 driver (``ipu6-cpd.c`` in particular) parses and validates
the CPD firmware file and gets the package directory binary data of the IPU6
firmware, copies it to specific DMA buffer and sets its base address to Buttress
``FW_SOURCE_BASE`` register. Finally the CSE will do authentication for this
firmware binary.


Syscom interface
================

The IPU6 driver communicates with firmware via the Syscom ABI. Syscom is an
inter-processor communication mechanism between the IPU scalar processors and
the CPU. There are a number of resources shared between firmware and software.
A system memory region where the message queues reside, firmware can access the
memory region via the IPU MMU. The Syscom queues are FIFO fixed depth queues
with a configurable number of tokens (messages). There are also common IPU6 MMIO
registers where the queue read and write indices reside. Software and firmware
function as producer and consumer of tokens in the queues and update the write
and read indices separately when sending or receiving each message.

The IPU6 driver must prepare and configure the number of input and output
queues, configure the count of tokens per queue and the size of per token before
initiating and starting the communication with firmware. Firmware and software
must use same configurations. The IPU6 Buttress has a number of firmware boot
parameter registers which can be used to store the address of configuration and
initialise the Syscom state, then driver can request firmware to start and run via
setting the scalar processor control status register.

Input System
============

IPU6 input system consists of MIPI D-PHY and several CSI-2 receivers.  It can
capture image pixel data from camera sensors or other MIPI CSI-2 output devices.

D-PHYs and CSI-2 ports lane mapping
-----------------------------------

The IPU6 integrates different D-PHY IPs on different SoCs, on Tiger Lake and
Alder Lake, IPU6 integrates MCD10 D-PHY, IPU6SE on Jasper Lake integrates JSL
D-PHY and IPU6EP on Meteor Lake integrates a Synopsys DWC D-PHY. There is an
adaptional layer between D-PHY and CSI-2 receiver controller which includes port
configuration, PHY wrapper or private test interfaces for D-PHY. There are 3
D-PHY drivers ``ipu6-isys-mcd-phy.c``, ``ipu6-isys-jsl-phy.c`` and
``ipu6-isys-dwc-phy.c`` program the above 3 D-PHYs in IPU6.

Different IPU6 versions have different D-PHY lanes mappings, On Tiger Lake,
there are 12 data lanes and 8 clock lanes, IPU6 support maximum 8 CSI-2 ports,
see the PPI mmapping in ``ipu6-isys-mcd-phy.c`` for more information. On Jasper
Lake and Alder Lake, D-PHY has 8 data lanes and 4 clock lanes, the IPU6 supports
maximum 4 CSI-2 ports. For Meteor Lake, D-PHY has 12 data lanes and 6 clock
lanes so IPU6 support maximum 6 CSI-2 ports.

.. Note:: Each pair of CSI-2 two ports is a single unit that can share the data
	  lanes. For example, for CSI-2 port 0 and 1, CSI-2 port 0 support
	  maximum 4 data lanes, CSI-2 port 1 support maximum 2 data lanes, CSI-2
	  port 0 with 2 data lanes can work together with CSI-2 port 1 with 2
	  data lanes. If trying to use CSI-2 port 0 with 4 lanes, CSI-2 port 1
	  will not be available as the 4 data lanes are shared by CSI-2 port 0
	  and 1. The same applies to CSI ports 2/3, 4/5 and 7/8.

ISYS firmware ABIs
------------------

The IPU6 firmware implements a series of ABIs for software access. In general,
software firstly prepares the stream configuration ``struct
ipu6_fw_isys_stream_cfg_data_abi`` and sends the configuration to firmware via
sending ``STREAM_OPEN`` command. Stream configuration includes input pins and
output pins, input pin ``struct ipu6_fw_isys_input_pin_info_abi`` defines the
resolution and data type of input source, output pin ``struct
ipu6_fw_isys_output_pin_info_abi`` defines the output resolution, stride and
frame format, etc.

Once the driver gets the interrupt from firmware that indicates stream open
successfully, the driver will send the ``STREAM_START`` and ``STREAM_CAPTURE``
command to request firmware to start capturing image frames. ``STREAM_CAPTURE``
command queues the buffers to firmware with ``struct
ipu6_fw_isys_frame_buff_set``, software then waits for the interrupt and
response from firmware, ``PIN_DATA_READY`` means a buffer is ready on a specific
output pin and then software can return the buffer to user.

.. Note:: See :ref:`Examples<ipu6_isys_capture_examples>` about how to do
	  capture by IPU6 ISYS driver.
