.. SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-2.0

=========================================
IAA Compression Accelerator Crypto Driver
=========================================

Tom Zanussi <tom.zanussi@linux.intel.com>

The IAA crypto driver supports compression/decompression compatible
with the DEFLATE compression standard described in RFC 1951, which is
the compression/decompression algorithm exported by this module.

The IAA hardware spec can be found here:

  https://cdrdv2.intel.com/v1/dl/getContent/721858

The iaa_crypto driver is designed to work as a layer underneath
higher-level compression devices such as zswap.

Users can select IAA compress/decompress acceleration by specifying
one of the supported IAA compression algorithms in whatever facility
allows compression algorithms to be selected.

For example, a zswap device can select the IAA 'fixed' mode
represented by selecting the 'deflate-iaa' crypto compression
algorithm::

  # echo deflate-iaa > /sys/module/zswap/parameters/compressor

This will tell zswap to use the IAA 'fixed' compression mode for all
compresses and decompresses.

Currently, there is only one compression modes available, 'fixed'
mode.

The 'fixed' compression mode implements the compression scheme
specified by RFC 1951 and is given the crypto algorithm name
'deflate-iaa'.  (Because the IAA hardware has a 4k history-window
limitation, only buffers <= 4k, or that have been compressed using a
<= 4k history window, are technically compliant with the deflate spec,
which allows for a window of up to 32k.  Because of this limitation,
the IAA fixed mode deflate algorithm is given its own algorithm name
rather than simply 'deflate').


Config options and other setup
==============================

The IAA crypto driver is available via menuconfig using the following
path::

  Cryptographic API -> Hardware crypto devices -> Support for Intel(R) IAA Compression Accelerator

In the configuration file the option called CONFIG_CRYPTO_DEV_IAA_CRYPTO.

The IAA crypto driver also supports statistics, which are available
via menuconfig using the following path::

  Cryptographic API -> Hardware crypto devices -> Support for Intel(R) IAA Compression -> Enable Intel(R) IAA Compression Accelerator Statistics

In the configuration file the option called CONFIG_CRYPTO_DEV_IAA_CRYPTO_STATS.

The following config options should also be enabled::

  CONFIG_IRQ_REMAP=y
  CONFIG_INTEL_IOMMU=y
  CONFIG_INTEL_IOMMU_SVM=y
  CONFIG_PCI_ATS=y
  CONFIG_PCI_PRI=y
  CONFIG_PCI_PASID=y
  CONFIG_INTEL_IDXD=m
  CONFIG_INTEL_IDXD_SVM=y

IAA is one of the first Intel accelerator IPs that can work in
conjunction with the Intel IOMMU.  There are multiple modes that exist
for testing. Based on IOMMU configuration, there are 3 modes::

  - Scalable
  - Legacy
  - No IOMMU


Scalable mode
-------------

Scalable mode supports Shared Virtual Memory (SVM or SVA). It is
entered when using the kernel boot commandline::

  intel_iommu=on,sm_on

with VT-d turned on in BIOS.

With scalable mode, both shared and dedicated workqueues are available
for use.

For scalable mode, the following BIOS settings should be enabled::

  Socket Configuration > IIO Configuration > Intel VT for Directed I/O (VT-d) > Intel VT for Directed I/O

  Socket Configuration > IIO Configuration > PCIe ENQCMD > ENQCMDS


Legacy mode
-----------

Legacy mode is entered when using the kernel boot commandline::

  intel_iommu=off

or VT-d is not turned on in BIOS.

If you have booted into Linux and not sure if VT-d is on, do a "dmesg
| grep -i dmar". If you don't see a number of DMAR devices enumerated,
most likely VT-d is not on.

With legacy mode, only dedicated workqueues are available for use.


No IOMMU mode
-------------

No IOMMU mode is entered when using the kernel boot commandline::

  iommu=off.

With no IOMMU mode, only dedicated workqueues are available for use.


Usage
=====

accel-config
------------

When loaded, the iaa_crypto driver automatically creates a default
configuration and enables it, and assigns default driver attributes.
If a different configuration or set of driver attributes is required,
the user must first disable the IAA devices and workqueues, reset the
configuration, and then re-register the deflate-iaa algorithm with the
crypto subsystem by removing and reinserting the iaa_crypto module.

The :ref:`iaa_disable_script` in the 'Use Cases'
section below can be used to disable the default configuration.

See :ref:`iaa_default_config` below for details of the default
configuration.

More likely than not, however, and because of the complexity and
configurability of the accelerator devices, the user will want to
configure the device and manually enable the desired devices and
workqueues.

The userspace tool to help doing that is called accel-config.  Using
accel-config to configure device or loading a previously saved config
is highly recommended.  The device can be controlled via sysfs
directly but comes with the warning that you should do this ONLY if
you know exactly what you are doing.  The following sections will not
cover the sysfs interface but assumes you will be using accel-config.

The :ref:`iaa_sysfs_config` section in the appendix below can be
consulted for the sysfs interface details if interested.

The accel-config tool along with instructions for building it can be
found here:

  https://github.com/intel/idxd-config/#readme

Typical usage
-------------

In order for the iaa_crypto module to actually do any
compression/decompression work on behalf of a facility, one or more
IAA workqueues need to be bound to the iaa_crypto driver.

For instance, here's an example of configuring an IAA workqueue and
binding it to the iaa_crypto driver (note that device names are
specified as 'iax' rather than 'iaa' - this is because upstream still
has the old 'iax' device naming in place) ::

  # configure wq1.0

  accel-config config-wq --group-id=0 --mode=dedicated --type=kernel --priority=10 --name="iaa_crypto" --driver-name="crypto" iax1/wq1.0

  accel-config config-engine iax1/engine1.0 --group-id=0

  # enable IAA device iax1

  accel-config enable-device iax1

  # enable wq1.0 on IAX device iax1

  accel-config enable-wq iax1/wq1.0

Whenever a new workqueue is bound to or unbound from the iaa_crypto
driver, the available workqueues are 'rebalanced' such that work
submitted from a particular CPU is given to the most appropriate
workqueue available.  Current best practice is to configure and bind
at least one workqueue for each IAA device, but as long as there is at
least one workqueue configured and bound to any IAA device in the
system, the iaa_crypto driver will work, albeit most likely not as
efficiently.

The IAA crypto algorigthms is operational and compression and
decompression operations are fully enabled following the successful
binding of the first IAA workqueue to the iaa_crypto driver.

Similarly, the IAA crypto algorithm is not operational and compression
and decompression operations are disabled following the unbinding of
the last IAA worqueue to the iaa_crypto driver.

As a result, the IAA crypto algorithms and thus the IAA hardware are
only available when one or more workques are bound to the iaa_crypto
driver.

When there are no IAA workqueues bound to the driver, the IAA crypto
algorithms can be unregistered by removing the module.


Driver attributes
-----------------

There are a couple user-configurable driver attributes that can be
used to configure various modes of operation.  They're listed below,
along with their default values.  To set any of these attributes, echo
the appropriate values to the attribute file located under
/sys/bus/dsa/drivers/crypto/

The attribute settings at the time the IAA algorithms are registered
are captured in each algorithm's crypto_ctx and used for all compresses
and decompresses when using that algorithm.

The available attributes are:

  - verify_compress

    Toggle compression verification.  If set, each compress will be
    internally decompressed and the contents verified, returning error
    codes if unsuccessful.  This can be toggled with 0/1::

      echo 0 > /sys/bus/dsa/drivers/crypto/verify_compress

    The default setting is '1' - verify all compresses.

  - sync_mode

    Select mode to be used to wait for completion of each compresses
    and decompress operation.

    The crypto async interface support implemented by iaa_crypto
    provides an implementation that satisfies the interface but does
    so in a synchronous manner - it fills and submits the IDXD
    descriptor and then loops around waiting for it to complete before
    returning.  This isn't a problem at the moment, since all existing
    callers (e.g. zswap) wrap any asynchronous callees in a
    synchronous wrapper anyway.

    The iaa_crypto driver does however provide true asynchronous
    support for callers that can make use of it.  In this mode, it
    fills and submits the IDXD descriptor, then returns immediately
    with -EINPROGRESS.  The caller can then either poll for completion
    itself, which requires specific code in the caller which currently
    nothing in the upstream kernel implements, or go to sleep and wait
    for an interrupt signaling completion.  This latter mode is
    supported by current users in the kernel such as zswap via
    synchronous wrappers.  Although it is supported this mode is
    significantly slower than the synchronous mode that does the
    polling in the iaa_crypto driver previously mentioned.

    This mode can be enabled by writing 'async_irq' to the sync_mode
    iaa_crypto driver attribute::

      echo async_irq > /sys/bus/dsa/drivers/crypto/sync_mode

    Async mode without interrupts (caller must poll) can be enabled by
    writing 'async' to it::

      echo async > /sys/bus/dsa/drivers/crypto/sync_mode

    The mode that does the polling in the iaa_crypto driver can be
    enabled by writing 'sync' to it::

      echo sync > /sys/bus/dsa/drivers/crypto/sync_mode

    The default mode is 'sync'.

.. _iaa_default_config:

IAA Default Configuration
-------------------------

When the iaa_crypto driver is loaded, each IAA device has a single
work queue configured for it, with the following attributes::

          mode              "dedicated"
          threshold         0
          size              Total WQ Size from WQCAP
          priority          10
          type              IDXD_WQT_KERNEL
          group             0
          name              "iaa_crypto"
          driver_name       "crypto"

The devices and workqueues are also enabled and therefore the driver
is ready to be used without any additional configuration.

The default driver attributes in effect when the driver is loaded are::

          sync_mode         "sync"
          verify_compress   1

In order to change either the device/work queue or driver attributes,
the enabled devices and workqueues must first be disabled.  In order
to have the new configuration applied to the deflate-iaa crypto
algorithm, it needs to be re-registered by removing and reinserting
the iaa_crypto module.  The :ref:`iaa_disable_script` in the 'Use
Cases' section below can be used to disable the default configuration.

Statistics
==========

If the optional debugfs statistics support is enabled, the IAA crypto
driver will generate statistics which can be accessed in debugfs at::

  # ls -al /sys/kernel/debug/iaa-crypto/
  total 0
  drwxr-xr-x  2 root root 0 Mar  3 07:55 .
  drwx------ 53 root root 0 Mar  3 07:55 ..
  -rw-r--r--  1 root root 0 Mar  3 07:55 global_stats
  -rw-r--r--  1 root root 0 Mar  3 07:55 stats_reset
  -rw-r--r--  1 root root 0 Mar  3 07:55 wq_stats

The global_stats file shows a set of global statistics collected since
the driver has been loaded or reset::

  # cat global_stats
  global stats:
    total_comp_calls: 4300
    total_decomp_calls: 4164
    total_sw_decomp_calls: 0
    total_comp_bytes_out: 5993989
    total_decomp_bytes_in: 5993989
    total_completion_einval_errors: 0
    total_completion_timeout_errors: 0
    total_completion_comp_buf_overflow_errors: 136

The wq_stats file shows per-wq stats, a set for each iaa device and wq
in addition to some global stats::

  # cat wq_stats
  iaa device:
    id: 1
    n_wqs: 1
    comp_calls: 0
    comp_bytes: 0
    decomp_calls: 0
    decomp_bytes: 0
    wqs:
      name: iaa_crypto
      comp_calls: 0
      comp_bytes: 0
      decomp_calls: 0
      decomp_bytes: 0

  iaa device:
    id: 3
    n_wqs: 1
    comp_calls: 0
    comp_bytes: 0
    decomp_calls: 0
    decomp_bytes: 0
    wqs:
      name: iaa_crypto
      comp_calls: 0
      comp_bytes: 0
      decomp_calls: 0
      decomp_bytes: 0

  iaa device:
    id: 5
    n_wqs: 1
    comp_calls: 1360
    comp_bytes: 1999776
    decomp_calls: 0
    decomp_bytes: 0
    wqs:
      name: iaa_crypto
      comp_calls: 1360
      comp_bytes: 1999776
      decomp_calls: 0
      decomp_bytes: 0

  iaa device:
    id: 7
    n_wqs: 1
    comp_calls: 2940
    comp_bytes: 3994213
    decomp_calls: 4164
    decomp_bytes: 5993989
    wqs:
      name: iaa_crypto
      comp_calls: 2940
      comp_bytes: 3994213
      decomp_calls: 4164
      decomp_bytes: 5993989
    ...

Writing to 'stats_reset' resets all the stats, including the
per-device and per-wq stats::

  # echo 1 > stats_reset
  # cat wq_stats
    global stats:
    total_comp_calls: 0
    total_decomp_calls: 0
    total_comp_bytes_out: 0
    total_decomp_bytes_in: 0
    total_completion_einval_errors: 0
    total_completion_timeout_errors: 0
    total_completion_comp_buf_overflow_errors: 0
    ...


Use cases
=========

Simple zswap test
-----------------

For this example, the kernel should be configured according to the
dedicated mode options described above, and zswap should be enabled as
well::

  CONFIG_ZSWAP=y

This is a simple test that uses iaa_compress as the compressor for a
swap (zswap) device.  It sets up the zswap device and then uses the
memory_memadvise program listed below to forcibly swap out and in a
specified number of pages, demonstrating both compress and decompress.

The zswap test expects the work queues for each IAA device on the
system to be configured properly as a kernel workqueue with a
workqueue driver_name of "crypto".

The first step is to make sure the iaa_crypto module is loaded::

  modprobe iaa_crypto

If the IAA devices and workqueues haven't previously been disabled and
reconfigured, then the default configuration should be in place and no
further IAA configuration is necessary.  See :ref:`iaa_default_config`
below for details of the default configuration.

If the default configuration is in place, you should see the iaa
devices and wq0s enabled::

  # cat /sys/bus/dsa/devices/iax1/state
  enabled
  # cat /sys/bus/dsa/devices/iax1/wq1.0/state
  enabled

To demonstrate that the following steps work as expected, these
commands can be used to enable debug output::

  # echo -n 'module iaa_crypto +p' > /sys/kernel/debug/dynamic_debug/control
  # echo -n 'module idxd +p' > /sys/kernel/debug/dynamic_debug/control

Use the following commands to enable zswap::

  # echo 0 > /sys/module/zswap/parameters/enabled
  # echo 50 > /sys/module/zswap/parameters/max_pool_percent
  # echo deflate-iaa > /sys/module/zswap/parameters/compressor
  # echo zsmalloc > /sys/module/zswap/parameters/zpool
  # echo 1 > /sys/module/zswap/parameters/enabled
  # echo 100 > /proc/sys/vm/swappiness
  # echo never > /sys/kernel/mm/transparent_hugepage/enabled
  # echo 1 > /proc/sys/vm/overcommit_memory

Now you can now run the zswap workload you want to measure. For
example, using the memory_memadvise code below, the following command
will swap in and out 100 pages::

  ./memory_madvise 100

  Allocating 100 pages to swap in/out
  Swapping out 100 pages
  Swapping in 100 pages
  Swapped out and in 100 pages

You should see something like the following in the dmesg output::

  [  404.202972] idxd 0000:e7:02.0: iaa_comp_acompress: dma_map_sg, src_addr 223925c000, nr_sgs 1, req->src 00000000ee7cb5e6, req->slen 4096, sg_dma_len(sg) 4096
  [  404.202973] idxd 0000:e7:02.0: iaa_comp_acompress: dma_map_sg, dst_addr 21dadf8000, nr_sgs 1, req->dst 000000008d6acea8, req->dlen 4096, sg_dma_len(sg) 8192
  [  404.202975] idxd 0000:e7:02.0: iaa_compress: desc->src1_addr 223925c000, desc->src1_size 4096, desc->dst_addr 21dadf8000, desc->max_dst_size 4096, desc->src2_addr 2203543000, desc->src2_size 1568
  [  404.202981] idxd 0000:e7:02.0: iaa_compress_verify: (verify) desc->src1_addr 21dadf8000, desc->src1_size 228, desc->dst_addr 223925c000, desc->max_dst_size 4096, desc->src2_addr 0, desc->src2_size 0
  ...

Now that basic functionality has been demonstrated, the defaults can
be erased and replaced with a different configuration.  To do that,
first disable zswap::

  # echo lzo > /sys/module/zswap/parameters/compressor
  # swapoff -a
  # echo 0 > /sys/module/zswap/parameters/accept_threshold_percent
  # echo 0 > /sys/module/zswap/parameters/max_pool_percent
  # echo 0 > /sys/module/zswap/parameters/enabled
  # echo 0 > /sys/module/zswap/parameters/enabled

Then run the :ref:`iaa_disable_script` in the 'Use Cases' section
below to disable the default configuration.

Finally turn swap back on::

  # swapon -a

Following all that the IAA device(s) can now be re-configured and
enabled as desired for further testing.  Below is one example.

The zswap test expects the work queues for each IAA device on the
system to be configured properly as a kernel workqueue with a
workqueue driver_name of "crypto".

The below script automatically does that::

  #!/bin/bash

  echo "IAA devices:"
  lspci -d:0cfe
  echo "# IAA devices:"
  lspci -d:0cfe | wc -l

  #
  # count iaa instances
  #
  iaa_dev_id="0cfe"
  num_iaa=$(lspci -d:${iaa_dev_id} | wc -l)
  echo "Found ${num_iaa} IAA instances"

  #
  # disable iaa wqs and devices
  #
  echo "Disable IAA"

  for ((i = 1; i < ${num_iaa} * 2; i += 2)); do
      echo disable wq iax${i}/wq${i}.0
      accel-config disable-wq iax${i}/wq${i}.0
      echo disable iaa iax${i}
      accel-config disable-device iax${i}
  done

  echo "End Disable IAA"

  echo "Reload iaa_crypto module"

  rmmod iaa_crypto
  modprobe iaa_crypto

  echo "End Reload iaa_crypto module"

  #
  # configure iaa wqs and devices
  #
  echo "Configure IAA"
  for ((i = 1; i < ${num_iaa} * 2; i += 2)); do
      accel-config config-wq --group-id=0 --mode=dedicated --wq-size=128 --priority=10 --type=kernel --name="iaa_crypto" --driver-name="crypto" iax${i}/wq${i}.0
      accel-config config-engine iax${i}/engine${i}.0 --group-id=0
  done

  echo "End Configure IAA"

  #
  # enable iaa wqs and devices
  #
  echo "Enable IAA"

  for ((i = 1; i < ${num_iaa} * 2; i += 2)); do
      echo enable iaa iax${i}
      accel-config enable-device iax${i}
      echo enable wq iax${i}/wq${i}.0
      accel-config enable-wq iax${i}/wq${i}.0
  done

  echo "End Enable IAA"

When the workqueues are bound to the iaa_crypto driver, you should
see something similar to the following in dmesg output if you've
enabled debug output (echo -n 'module iaa_crypto +p' >
/sys/kernel/debug/dynamic_debug/control)::

  [   60.752344] idxd 0000:f6:02.0: add_iaa_wq: added wq 000000004068d14d to iaa 00000000c9585ba2, n_wq 1
  [   60.752346] iaa_crypto: rebalance_wq_table: nr_nodes=2, nr_cpus 160, nr_iaa 8, cpus_per_iaa 20
  [   60.752347] iaa_crypto: rebalance_wq_table: iaa=0
  [   60.752349] idxd 0000:6a:02.0: request_iaa_wq: getting wq from iaa_device 0000000042d7bc52 (0)
  [   60.752350] idxd 0000:6a:02.0: request_iaa_wq: returning unused wq 00000000c8bb4452 (0) from iaa device 0000000042d7bc52 (0)
  [   60.752352] iaa_crypto: rebalance_wq_table: assigned wq for cpu=0, node=0 = wq 00000000c8bb4452
  [   60.752354] iaa_crypto: rebalance_wq_table: iaa=0
  [   60.752355] idxd 0000:6a:02.0: request_iaa_wq: getting wq from iaa_device 0000000042d7bc52 (0)
  [   60.752356] idxd 0000:6a:02.0: request_iaa_wq: returning unused wq 00000000c8bb4452 (0) from iaa device 0000000042d7bc52 (0)
  [   60.752358] iaa_crypto: rebalance_wq_table: assigned wq for cpu=1, node=0 = wq 00000000c8bb4452
  [   60.752359] iaa_crypto: rebalance_wq_table: iaa=0
  [   60.752360] idxd 0000:6a:02.0: request_iaa_wq: getting wq from iaa_device 0000000042d7bc52 (0)
  [   60.752361] idxd 0000:6a:02.0: request_iaa_wq: returning unused wq 00000000c8bb4452 (0) from iaa device 0000000042d7bc52 (0)
  [   60.752362] iaa_crypto: rebalance_wq_table: assigned wq for cpu=2, node=0 = wq 00000000c8bb4452
  [   60.752364] iaa_crypto: rebalance_wq_table: iaa=0
  .
  .
  .

Once the workqueues and devices have been enabled, the IAA crypto
algorithms are enabled and available.  When the IAA crypto algorithms
have been successfully enabled, you should see the following dmesg
output::

  [   64.893759] iaa_crypto: iaa_crypto_enable: iaa_crypto now ENABLED

Now run the following zswap-specific setup commands to have zswap use
the 'fixed' compression mode::

  echo 0 > /sys/module/zswap/parameters/enabled
  echo 50 > /sys/module/zswap/parameters/max_pool_percent
  echo deflate-iaa > /sys/module/zswap/parameters/compressor
  echo zsmalloc > /sys/module/zswap/parameters/zpool
  echo 1 > /sys/module/zswap/parameters/enabled

  echo 100 > /proc/sys/vm/swappiness
  echo never > /sys/kernel/mm/transparent_hugepage/enabled
  echo 1 > /proc/sys/vm/overcommit_memory

Finally, you can now run the zswap workload you want to measure. For
example, using the code below, the following command will swap in and
out 100 pages::

  ./memory_madvise 100

  Allocating 100 pages to swap in/out
  Swapping out 100 pages
  Swapping in 100 pages
  Swapped out and in 100 pages

You should see something like the following in the dmesg output if
you've enabled debug output (echo -n 'module iaa_crypto +p' >
/sys/kernel/debug/dynamic_debug/control)::

  [  404.202972] idxd 0000:e7:02.0: iaa_comp_acompress: dma_map_sg, src_addr 223925c000, nr_sgs 1, req->src 00000000ee7cb5e6, req->slen 4096, sg_dma_len(sg) 4096
  [  404.202973] idxd 0000:e7:02.0: iaa_comp_acompress: dma_map_sg, dst_addr 21dadf8000, nr_sgs 1, req->dst 000000008d6acea8, req->dlen 4096, sg_dma_len(sg) 8192
  [  404.202975] idxd 0000:e7:02.0: iaa_compress: desc->src1_addr 223925c000, desc->src1_size 4096, desc->dst_addr 21dadf8000, desc->max_dst_size 4096, desc->src2_addr 2203543000, desc->src2_size 1568
  [  404.202981] idxd 0000:e7:02.0: iaa_compress_verify: (verify) desc->src1_addr 21dadf8000, desc->src1_size 228, desc->dst_addr 223925c000, desc->max_dst_size 4096, desc->src2_addr 0, desc->src2_size 0
  [  409.203227] idxd 0000:e7:02.0: iaa_comp_adecompress: dma_map_sg, src_addr 21ddd8b100, nr_sgs 1, req->src 0000000084adab64, req->slen 228, sg_dma_len(sg) 228
  [  409.203235] idxd 0000:e7:02.0: iaa_comp_adecompress: dma_map_sg, dst_addr 21ee3dc000, nr_sgs 1, req->dst 000000004e2990d0, req->dlen 4096, sg_dma_len(sg) 4096
  [  409.203239] idxd 0000:e7:02.0: iaa_decompress: desc->src1_addr 21ddd8b100, desc->src1_size 228, desc->dst_addr 21ee3dc000, desc->max_dst_size 4096, desc->src2_addr 0, desc->src2_size 0
  [  409.203254] idxd 0000:e7:02.0: iaa_comp_adecompress: dma_map_sg, src_addr 21ddd8b100, nr_sgs 1, req->src 0000000084adab64, req->slen 228, sg_dma_len(sg) 228
  [  409.203256] idxd 0000:e7:02.0: iaa_comp_adecompress: dma_map_sg, dst_addr 21f1551000, nr_sgs 1, req->dst 000000004e2990d0, req->dlen 4096, sg_dma_len(sg) 4096
  [  409.203257] idxd 0000:e7:02.0: iaa_decompress: desc->src1_addr 21ddd8b100, desc->src1_size 228, desc->dst_addr 21f1551000, desc->max_dst_size 4096, desc->src2_addr 0, desc->src2_size 0

In order to unregister the IAA crypto algorithms, and register new
ones using different parameters, any users of the current algorithm
should be stopped and the IAA workqueues and devices disabled.

In the case of zswap, remove the IAA crypto algorithm as the
compressor and turn off swap (to remove all references to
iaa_crypto)::

  echo lzo > /sys/module/zswap/parameters/compressor
  swapoff -a

  echo 0 > /sys/module/zswap/parameters/accept_threshold_percent
  echo 0 > /sys/module/zswap/parameters/max_pool_percent
  echo 0 > /sys/module/zswap/parameters/enabled

Once zswap is disabled and no longer using iaa_crypto, the IAA wqs and
devices can be disabled.

.. _iaa_disable_script:

IAA disable script
------------------

The below script automatically does that::

  #!/bin/bash

  echo "IAA devices:"
  lspci -d:0cfe
  echo "# IAA devices:"
  lspci -d:0cfe | wc -l

  #
  # count iaa instances
  #
  iaa_dev_id="0cfe"
  num_iaa=$(lspci -d:${iaa_dev_id} | wc -l)
  echo "Found ${num_iaa} IAA instances"

  #
  # disable iaa wqs and devices
  #
  echo "Disable IAA"

  for ((i = 1; i < ${num_iaa} * 2; i += 2)); do
      echo disable wq iax${i}/wq${i}.0
      accel-config disable-wq iax${i}/wq${i}.0
      echo disable iaa iax${i}
      accel-config disable-device iax${i}
  done

  echo "End Disable IAA"

Finally, at this point the iaa_crypto module can be removed, which
will unregister the current IAA crypto algorithms::

  rmmod iaa_crypto


memory_madvise.c (gcc -o memory_memadvise memory_madvise.c)::

  #include <stdio.h>
  #include <stdlib.h>
  #include <string.h>
  #include <unistd.h>
  #include <sys/mman.h>
  #include <linux/mman.h>

  #ifndef MADV_PAGEOUT
  #define MADV_PAGEOUT    21      /* force pages out immediately */
  #endif

  #define PG_SZ           4096

  int main(int argc, char **argv)
  {
        int i, nr_pages = 1;
        int64_t *dump_ptr;
        char *addr, *a;
        int loop = 1;

        if (argc > 1)
                nr_pages = atoi(argv[1]);

        printf("Allocating %d pages to swap in/out\n", nr_pages);

        /* allocate pages */
        addr = mmap(NULL, nr_pages * PG_SZ, PROT_READ | PROT_WRITE, MAP_SHARED | MAP_ANONYMOUS, -1, 0);
        *addr = 1;

        /* initialize data in page to all '*' chars */
        memset(addr, '*', nr_pages * PG_SZ);

         printf("Swapping out %d pages\n", nr_pages);

        /* Tell kernel to swap it out */
        madvise(addr, nr_pages * PG_SZ, MADV_PAGEOUT);

        while (loop > 0) {
                /* Wait for swap out to finish */
                sleep(5);

                a = addr;

                printf("Swapping in %d pages\n", nr_pages);

                /* Access the page ... this will swap it back in again */
                for (i = 0; i < nr_pages; i++) {
                        if (a[0] != '*') {
                                printf("Bad data from decompress!!!!!\n");

                                dump_ptr = (int64_t *)a;
                                 for (int j = 0; j < 100; j++) {
                                        printf("  page %d data: %#llx\n", i, *dump_ptr);
                                        dump_ptr++;
                                }
                        }

                        a += PG_SZ;
                }

                loop --;
        }

       printf("Swapped out and in %d pages\n", nr_pages);

Appendix
========

.. _iaa_sysfs_config:

IAA sysfs config interface
--------------------------

Below is a description of the IAA sysfs interface, which as mentioned
in the main document, should only be used if you know exactly what you
are doing.  Even then, there's no compelling reason to use it directly
since accel-config can do everything the sysfs interface can and in
fact accel-config is based on it under the covers.

The 'IAA config path' is /sys/bus/dsa/devices and contains
subdirectories representing each IAA device, workqueue, engine, and
group.  Note that in the sysfs interface, the IAA devices are actually
named using iax e.g. iax1, iax3, etc. (Note that IAA devices are the
odd-numbered devices; the even-numbered devices are DSA devices and
can be ignored for IAA).

The 'IAA device bind path' is /sys/bus/dsa/drivers/idxd/bind and is
the file that is written to enable an IAA device.

The 'IAA workqueue bind path' is /sys/bus/dsa/drivers/crypto/bind and
is the file that is written to enable an IAA workqueue.

Similarly /sys/bus/dsa/drivers/idxd/unbind and
/sys/bus/dsa/drivers/crypto/unbind are used to disable IAA devices and
workqueues.

The basic sequence of commands needed to set up the IAA devices and
workqueues is:

For each device::
  1) Disable any workqueues enabled on the device.  For example to
     disable workques 0 and 1 on IAA device 3::

       # echo wq3.0 > /sys/bus/dsa/drivers/crypto/unbind
       # echo wq3.1 > /sys/bus/dsa/drivers/crypto/unbind

  2) Disable the device. For example to disable IAA device 3::

       # echo iax3 > /sys/bus/dsa/drivers/idxd/unbind

  3) configure the desired workqueues.  For example, to configure
     workqueue 3 on IAA device 3::

       # echo dedicated > /sys/bus/dsa/devices/iax3/wq3.3/mode
       # echo 128 > /sys/bus/dsa/devices/iax3/wq3.3/size
       # echo 0 > /sys/bus/dsa/devices/iax3/wq3.3/group_id
       # echo 10 > /sys/bus/dsa/devices/iax3/wq3.3/priority
       # echo "kernel" > /sys/bus/dsa/devices/iax3/wq3.3/type
       # echo "iaa_crypto" > /sys/bus/dsa/devices/iax3/wq3.3/name
       # echo "crypto" > /sys/bus/dsa/devices/iax3/wq3.3/driver_name

  4) Enable the device. For example to enable IAA device 3::

       # echo iax3 > /sys/bus/dsa/drivers/idxd/bind

  5) Enable the desired workqueues on the device.  For example to
     enable workques 0 and 1 on IAA device 3::

       # echo wq3.0 > /sys/bus/dsa/drivers/crypto/bind
       # echo wq3.1 > /sys/bus/dsa/drivers/crypto/bind
