.. SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-2.0-only

=============
AD4062 driver
=============

ADC driver for Analog Devices Inc. AD4060/AD4062 devices. The module name is
``ad4062``.

Supported devices
=================

The following chips are supported by this driver:

* `AD4060 <https://www.analog.com/AD4060>`_
* `AD4062 <https://www.analog.com/AD4062>`_

Wiring modes
============

The ADC is interfaced through an I3C bus, and contains two programmable GPIOs.

The ADC convert-start happens on the SDA rising edge of the I3C stop (P) bit
at the end of the read command.

The two programmable GPIOS are optional and have a role assigned if present in
the devicetree:

- GP0: Is assigned the role of Threshold Either signal.
- GP1: Is assigned the role of Data Ready signal.

Device attributes
=================

The ADC contains only one channel with following attributes:

.. list-table:: Channel attributes
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Attribute
     - Description
   * - ``in_voltage_calibscale``
     - Sets the scale factor to multiply the raw value.
   * - ``in_voltage_oversampling_ratio``
     - Sets device's burst averaging mode to over sample using the
       internal sample rate. Value 1 disable the burst averaging mode.
   * - ``in_voltage_oversampling_ratio_available``
     - List of available oversampling values.
   * - ``in_voltage_raw``
     - Returns the raw ADC voltage value.
   * - ``in_voltage_scale``
     - Returs the channel scale in reference to the reference voltage
       ``ref-supply``.

Also contain the following device attributes:

.. list-table:: Device attributes
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Attribute
     - Description
   * - ``oversamling_frequency``
     - Sets the sets the device internal sample rate, used in the burst
       averaging mode and monitor modes.
   * - ``oversampling_frequency_available``
     - Lists the available device internal sample rates.

Interrupts
==========

The interrupts are mapped through the ``interrupt-names`` and ``interrupts``
properties.

The ``interrup-names`` ``gp0`` entry sets the role of Threshold signal, and
entry ``gp1`` the role of Data Ready signal.

If each is not present, the driver fallback to enabling the same role as an
I3C IBI.

Low-power mode
==============

The device enters low-power mode on idle to save power. Enabling an event puts
the device out of the low-power since the ADC autonomously samples to assert
the event condition.

IIO trigger support
===================

An IIO trigger is registered to the same device, to capture samples to a
software buffer. The acquisition is sequential and bounded by the protocol,
internal, and software delays, the sample rate is not configurable.
The burst averaging mode does impact the effective sample rate, since it
increases the internal delay.

Threshold events
================

The ADC supports a monitoring mode to raise threshold events. The driver
supports a single interrupt for both rising and falling readings.

The feature is enabled/disabled by setting ``thresh_either_en``. During monitor
mode, the device continuously operates in autonomous mode. Any register access
puts the device back in configuration mode, due to this, any access disables
monitor mode.

The following event attributes are available:

.. list-table:: Event attributes
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Attribute
     - Description
   * - ``sampling_frequency``
     - Frequency used in the monitoring mode, sets the device internal sample
       rate when the mode is activated.
   * - ``sampling_frequency_available``
     - List of available sample rates.
   * - ``thresh_either_en``
     - Enable monitoring mode.
   * - ``thresh_falling_hysteresis``
     - Set the hysteresis value for the minimum threshold.
   * - ``thresh_falling_value``
     - Set the minimum threshold value.
   * - ``thresh_rising_hysteresis``
     - Set the hysteresis value for the maximum threshold.
   * - ``thresh_rising_value``
     - Set the maximum threshold value.

Unimplemented features
======================

- Trigger mode
- Averaging mode
