.. SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-2.0-only

==============
AD5529R driver
==============

Device driver for Analog Devices Inc. AD5529R 16-Channel 16-bit High Voltage DAC.
The module name is ``ad5529r``.

Supported devices
=================

* `AD5529R <https://www.analog.com/en/products/ad5529r.html>`_

Description
===========

The AD5529R is a 16-channel, 16-bit, high voltage, buffered voltage output
digital-to-analog converter (DAC) with an integrated precision reference.
The device operates from unipolar and bipolar supplies and is guaranteed
monotonic. It has built-in rail-to-rail output buffers that can source or
sink up to 25mA.

Hardware Features
=================

* 16 independent 16-bit DAC channels
* Independently programmable output ranges:

  - 0V to 5V
  - 0V to 10V
  - 0V to 20V
  - 0V to 40V
  - ±5V to ±15V
  - ±10V to ±20V

* 4.096V precision reference (12ppm/°C maximum)
* Built-in function generation capabilities (hardware support)
* Output voltage and current monitoring (hardware support)
* Temperature monitoring with 8 on-chip sensors (hardware support)
* Over-temperature protection
* SPI interface with CRC error detection support

Current Driver Implementation
=============================

The current driver provides basic DAC functionality with the following features:

* Basic DAC output control for all 16 channels
* SPI communication with regmap support
* GPIO reset control
* Debugfs register access for development

SPI Configuration:

* **Mode**: Supports SPI mode 0 (CPOL=0, CPHA=0)
* **Frequency**: Up to 50 MHz (typically tested at lower frequencies)
* **Word Size**: 16-bit transactions

.. note::
   The driver configures the device in address decrement mode (ADDR_ASCENSION=0)
   for multi-byte SPI transactions. This means when accessing multi-byte registers,
   the address decrements for subsequent bytes in the transaction.

IIO Attributes (Currently Implemented)
======================================

Basic DAC Control
-----------------

For each of the 16 channels (0-15):

**out_voltageY_raw**
  Raw 16-bit DAC code (0-65535)

  * Read: Returns the current DAC register value
  * Write: Sets the DAC output code

Debug Interface
===============

**Register Access**

The driver provides debugfs register access for debugging and development:

``/sys/kernel/debug/iio/iio:deviceX/direct_reg_access``
  Direct register read/write access. Format:

  * Read: ``echo <register_address> > direct_reg_access; cat direct_reg_access``
  * Write: ``echo <register_address> <value> > direct_reg_access``

Usage examples
==============

Basic DAC Output Control
------------------------

.. code-block:: bash

    # Set channel 0 to mid-scale (approximately 2.048V with 4.096V reference)
    echo "32768" > /sys/bus/iio/devices/iio:device0/out_voltage0_raw

    # Set channel 15 to full scale
    echo "65535" > /sys/bus/iio/devices/iio:device0/out_voltage15_raw

    # Read current value from channel 5
    cat /sys/bus/iio/devices/iio:device0/out_voltage5_raw

Register Access for Development
-------------------------------

.. code-block:: bash

    # Navigate to debugfs directory
    cd /sys/kernel/debug/iio/iio:device0/

    # Read device product ID (register 0x04)
    echo 4 > direct_reg_access
    cat direct_reg_access

    # Write to a 16-bit configuration register (example: LDAC_HW_SW register 0x18)
    echo "0x018 0xAA11" > direct_reg_access
    cat direct_reg_access
    # Output: 0xAA11

    # Write to DAC channel registers (16-bit values)
    echo "0x148 32768" > direct_reg_access   # DAC channel 0 mid-scale
    echo "0x14A 65535" > direct_reg_access   # DAC channel 1 full-scale

    # Read back DAC register values
    echo 0x148 > direct_reg_access && cat direct_reg_access  # Read channel 0
    echo 0x14A > direct_reg_access && cat direct_reg_access  # Read channel 1

.. note::
   For 16-bit registers, use hexadecimal format for addresses (0x018, 0x148, etc.).
   Values can be decimal (32768) or hexadecimal (0xAA11). The device operates in
   address decrement mode internally during multi-byte transactions.

Device Tree Configuration
=========================

Basic configuration example (based on existing overlay):

.. code-block:: devicetree

    &spi0 {
        status = "okay";

        ad5529r@0 {
            compatible = "adi,ad5529r";
            reg = <0>;
            spi-max-frequency = <100000>;
            spi-cpha;
            spi-cpol;

            /* Optional reset GPIO (active low) */
            /* reset-gpios = <&gpio 19 GPIO_ACTIVE_LOW>; */
        };
    };

.. note::
   Some device tree overlays may include supply properties like ``vdd-supply``
   and ``hvdd-supply``, but these are not currently handled by the driver.

For complete device tree binding documentation, see:
``Documentation/devicetree/bindings/iio/dac/adi,ad5529r.yaml``

Driver Architecture
===================

The driver is structured as follows:

* **Core**: Basic SPI communication and device initialization
* **IIO Interface**: Standard IIO DAC channel interface
* **Regmap**: Register access abstraction
* **GPIO**: Reset control

Development Notes
=================

* The driver uses regmap for register access abstraction
* SPI mode 0 (CPOL=0, CPHA=0) is typically used
* Reset GPIO is optional but recommended for reliable operation
* The device supports address ascension mode for multi-byte transfers

References
==========

* AD5529R Datasheet: https://www.analog.com/media/en/technical-documentation/data-sheets/ad5529r.pdf
* Linux IIO Subsystem: https://www.kernel.org/doc/html/latest/driver-api/iio/index.html