.. SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-2.0-only

=============
AD7768 driver
=============

ADC driver for Analog Devices Inc. AD7768 and AD7768-4 devices. The module name
is ``ad7768``.

Supported devices
=================

The following chips are supported by this driver:

* `AD7768 <https://www.analog.com/en/products/ad7768.html>`_ - 8-channel, 24-bit simultaneous sampling ADC
* `AD7768-4 <https://www.analog.com/en/products/ad7768-4.html>`_ - 4-channel, 24-bit simultaneous sampling ADC

Supported features
==================

Power modes
-----------

The AD7768 family supports three configurable power and performance modes:

* **Low power mode** - Optimized for lowest power consumption
* **Median mode** - Balanced power and performance
* **Fast mode** - Highest performance with maximum sampling rates

The power mode affects the available sampling frequencies and power consumption.
Set via the ``adi,power-mode`` device tree property.

Data output configuration
-------------------------

The devices support flexible serial data output configurations:

AD7768 data lines
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

* 1 data line (DOUT0) - Standard single-lane output
* 2 data lines (DOUT0, DOUT1) - Dual-lane output for higher throughput
* 8 data lines (DOUT0-DOUT7) - Maximum throughput, one line per channel

AD7768-4 data lines
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

* 1 data line (DOUT0) - Standard single-lane output
* 4 data lines (DOUT0-DOUT3) - Maximum throughput, one line per channel

The number of data lines is configured via the ``adi,data-lines-number``
device tree property.

Channel configuration
---------------------

Each channel can be individually configured with:

Channel modes
^^^^^^^^^^^^^

* **Mode A** - First set of filter and decimation settings
* **Mode B** - Second set of filter and decimation settings

Each channel can be assigned to either Mode A or Mode B via the
``adi,ch-mode`` device tree property.

Precharge and reference buffers
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Per-channel buffer control for optimal signal integrity:

* Positive input precharge buffer (``adi,prebuf-pos-en``)
* Negative input precharge buffer (``adi,prebuf-neg-en``)
* Positive reference buffer (``adi,refbuf-pos-en``)
* Negative reference buffer (``adi,refbuf-neg-en``)

Common mode voltage
-------------------

Configurable common mode output voltage levels:

* (AVDD - AVSS) / 2V
* 1.65V
* 2.5V
* 2.14V

Set via the ``adi,common-mode-output`` device tree property.
The common mode buffer can be powered down using ``adi,vcm-power-down``.

Filter types
------------

Two digital filter types are available:

* **Wideband** - Optimized for wide bandwidth applications
* **Sinc5** - Fifth-order sinc filter for high rejection of out-of-band noise

IIO backend support
-------------------

The driver integrates with IIO backends (e.g., AXI ADC) for high-speed data
capture and DMA operations. Features include:

* Automatic channel enable/disable based on scan mask
* CRC on data interface. CRC replaces the header every 4th output sample.
* High-throughput buffered data acquisition

GPIO controller
---------------

The AD7768 includes a 5-pin GPIO controller for auxiliary digital I/O
operations. The GPIO pins can be configured as inputs or outputs.

Device attributes
=================

The following IIO attributes are available for each enabled channel:

Channel data
------------

+---------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------+
| Attribute                             | Description                                                  |
+=======================================+==============================================================+
| ``in_voltage<N>_raw``                 | Raw ADC voltage value for channel N.                         |
+---------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------+
| ``in_voltage<N>_scale``               | Scale factor to convert raw value to mV.                     |
+---------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------+

Sampling frequency
------------------

+---------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------+
| Attribute                             | Description                                                  |
+=======================================+==============================================================+
| ``in_voltage<N>_sampling_frequency``  | Current sampling frequency in Hz for channel N.              |
+---------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------+

Filter configuration
---------------------

+---------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------+
| Attribute                             | Description                                                  |
+=======================================+==============================================================+
| ``in_voltage<N>_filter_type``         | Current filter type for channel N: "wideband" or "sinc5".    |
+---------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------+
| ``in_voltage<N>_filter_type_          | Available filter types for channel N: "wideband sinc5".      |
| available``                           |                                                              |
+---------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------+

Per-channel calibration
-----------------------

+---------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------+
| Attribute                             | Description                                                  |
+=======================================+==============================================================+
| ``in_voltage<N>_calibbias``           | Channel offset calibration value                             |
+---------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------+
| ``in_voltage<N>_calibscale``          | Channel gain calibration value                               |
+---------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------+
| ``in_voltage<N>_phase``               | Channel phase calibration value.                             |
+---------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------+

Device buffers
==============

This driver supports IIO buffered data acquisition through IIO backends.
When used with compatible backends like the AXI ADC, it provides:

* High-speed simultaneous sampling across all enabled channels
* Hardware-triggered data capture
* DMA-based data transfer for minimal CPU overhead
* CRC error detection and correction

See :doc:`iio_devbuf` for more information about IIO device buffers.

Example usage
=============

.. code-block:: bash

	# Read current sampling frequency for channel 0
	cat /sys/bus/iio/devices/iio:device0/in_voltage0_sampling_frequency

	# Update sampling frequency for channel 0
	echo 8000 > /sys/bus/iio/devices/iio:device0/in_voltage0_sampling_frequency

	# Read current filter type for channel 0
	cat /sys/bus/iio/devices/iio:device0/in_voltage0_filter_type

	# List available filter types for channel 0
	cat /sys/bus/iio/devices/iio:device0/in_voltage0_filter_type_available

	# Update filter type for channel 0 to wideband
	echo wideband > /sys/bus/iio/devices/iio:device0/in_voltage0_filter_type

	# Read calibration scale for channel 0
	cat /sys/bus/iio/devices/iio:device0/in_voltage0_calibscale

	# Read phase calibration for channel 0
	cat /sys/bus/iio/devices/iio:device0/in_voltage0_phase


Unimplemented features
======================

* CRC message every 16 samples (CRC_SEL configuration) - currently only supports CRC every 4 samples
