.. SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-2.0

===============
ADF41513 driver
===============

This driver supports Analog Devices' ADF41513 and ADF41510 PLL frequency
synthesizers on SPI bus.

1. Supported devices
====================

* `ADF41510 <https://www.analog.com/ADF41510>`_
* `ADF41513 <https://www.analog.com/ADF41513>`_

The ADF41513 is an ultralow noise frequency synthesizer that can be used to
implement local oscillators (LOs) as high as 26.5 GHz in the upconversion and
downconversion sections of wireless receivers and transmitters. The ADF41510
is a similar device that supports frequencies up to 10 GHz.

Both devices support integer-N and fractional-N operation modes, providing
excellent phase noise performance and flexible frequency generation
capabilities.

Key Features:

- **ADF41513**: 1 GHz to 26.5 GHz frequency range
- **ADF41510**: 1 GHz to 10 GHz frequency range
- Integer-N and fractional-N operation modes
- Ultra-low phase noise (-235 dBc/Hz integer-N, -231 dBc/Hz fractional-N)
- High maximum PFD frequency (250 MHz integer-N, 125 MHz fractional-N)
- 25-bit fixed modulus or 49-bit variable modulus fractional modes
- Programmable charge pump currents with 16x range
- Digital lock detect functionality
- Phase resync capability for consistent output phase
- Clock framework integration for system clock generation

2. Device attributes
====================

The ADF41513 driver provides the following IIO extended attributes for
frequency control and monitoring:

Each IIO device has a device folder under ``/sys/bus/iio/devices/iio:deviceX``,
where X is the IIO index of the device. Under these folders reside a set of
device files that provide access to the synthesizer's functionality.

The following table shows the ADF41513 related device files:

+----------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Device file          | Description                                           |
+======================+=======================================================+
| frequency            | RF output frequency control and readback (Hz)         |
+----------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| frequency_resolution | Target frequency resolution control (Hz)              |
+----------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| pfd_frequency        | Phase Frequency Detector frequency readback (Hz)      |
+----------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| refin_frequency      | Reference input frequency control and readback (Hz)   |
+----------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| powerdown            | Power management control (0=active, 1=power down)     |
+----------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| ld_count             | Lock detect count configuration (2-8192)              |
+----------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| ld_count_available   | Available lock detect count values (read-only)        |
+----------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+

2.1 Frequency Control
----------------------

The ``frequency`` attribute controls the RF output frequency with sub-Hz precision.
The driver automatically selects between integer-N and fractional-N modes to
achieve the requested frequency with the best possible phase noise performance.

**Supported ranges:**

- **ADF41513**: 1,000,000,000 Hz to 26,500,000,000 Hz (1 GHz to 26.5 GHz)
- **ADF41510**: 1,000,000,000 Hz to 10,000,000,000 Hz (1 GHz to 10 GHz)

The frequency is specified in Hz, for sub-Hz precision use decimal notation.
For example, 12.102000000 GHz would be written as "12102000000.000000".

2.2 Frequency Resolution Control
--------------------------------

The ``frequency_resolution`` attribute controls the target frequency resolution
that the driver attempts to achieve. This affects the choice between fixed
modulus (25-bit) and variable modulus (49-bit) fractional-N modes:

- **Fixed modulus**: Resolution = f_PFD / 2^25 (typically ~3 Hz with 100 MHz PFD)
- **Variable modulus**: Resolution = f_PFD / 2^49 (µHz resolution possible)

Default resolution is 1 Hz (1,000,000 µHz).

2.3 Reference Input Control
---------------------------

The ``refin_frequency`` attribute allows control of the reference input frequency
when using a programmable reference clock. The supported range is 10 MHz to
800 MHz.

2.4 PFD Frequency Monitoring
----------------------------

The ``pfd_frequency`` attribute provides read-only access to the current Phase
Frequency Detector (PFD) frequency. The PFD frequency is automatically calculated
by the driver based on the reference input configuration and is used as the
fundamental frequency step for the synthesizer.

The PFD frequency is determined by: f_PFD = REF_IN * ((1 + D)/(R * (1 + T)))

Where:
- REF_IN is the reference input frequency
- D is the doubler state (0 or 1)
- R is the reference divider (1-32)
- T is the divide-by-2 state (0 or 1)

This attribute is useful for understanding the actual frequency resolution and
verifying the PLL configuration.

2.5 Lock Detect Count Configuration
------------------------------------

The ``ld_count`` attribute controls the lock detect counter window, which
determines the number of consecutive PFD cycles that must pass with no phase
error before the PLL is considered locked.

**Supported values:**
- Fast mode (2, 4, 8, 16, 32): Uses faster lock detection for quick settling
- Standard mode (64, 128, 256, 512, 1024, 2048, 4096, 8192): Higher counts
  provide more robust lock detection with better noise immunity

Default value is 64 cycles.

The available values can be queried using the ``ld_count_available`` read-only
attribute.

Higher lock detect counts improve lock stability but increase the lock
validation time. Lower counts may be more susceptible to false lock indications
in noisy environments.

2.6 Power Management
--------------------

The ``powerdown`` attribute provides software power control:

- **0**: Device active and operational
- **1**: Device in power-down mode (low power consumption)

3. Operating modes
==================

3.1 Integer-N Mode
------------------

When the requested frequency can be achieved as an integer multiple of the PFD
frequency (within the specified resolution tolerance), the driver automatically
selects integer-N mode for optimal phase noise performance.

In integer-N mode:

- Phase noise: -235 dBc/Hz normalized floor
- Frequency resolution: f_PFD (same as PFD frequency)
- Maximum PFD frequency: 250 MHz
- Bleed current: Disabled for best performance

3.2 Fractional-N Mode
---------------------

When sub-integer frequency steps are required, the driver automatically selects
fractional-N mode using either fixed or variable modulus.

**Fixed Modulus (25-bit)**:

- Used when variable modulus is not required
- Resolution: f_PFD / 2^25
- Simpler implementation, faster settling

**Variable Modulus (49-bit)**:

- Used for maximum resolution requirements
- Resolution: f_PFD / 2^49 (theoretical)
- Exact frequency synthesis capability

In fractional-N mode:

- Phase noise: -231 dBc/Hz normalized floor
- Maximum PFD frequency: 125 MHz
- Bleed current: Automatically enabled and optimized
- Dithering: Enabled to reduce fractional spurs

3.3 Automatic Mode Selection
----------------------------

The driver automatically selects the optimal operating mode based on:

1. **Frequency accuracy requirements**: Determined by frequency_resolution setting
2. **Phase noise optimization**: Integer-N preferred when possible
3. **PFD frequency constraints**: Different limits for integer vs fractional modes
4. **Prescaler selection**: Automatic 4/5 vs 8/9 prescaler selection based on frequency

4. Clock framework integration
==============================

The ADF41513 driver integrates with the Linux Common Clock Framework (CCF) when
the device tree includes clock provider properties (``#clock-cells = <0>``).

When enabled, the driver registers as a clock provider, allowing other kernel
drivers to use the synthesizer output as a system clock source.

**Device tree configuration for clock provider**:

.. code-block:: dts

    adf41513@0 {
        compatible = "adi,adf41513";
        reg = <0>;
        /* ... other properties ... */
        #clock-cells = <0>;
        clock-output-names = "adf41513_clk";
    };

**Clock consumer example**:

.. code-block:: dts

    some_device {
        clocks = <&adf41513>;
        clock-names = "ref_clk";
    };

5. Device tree configuration
============================

See ``Documentation/devicetree/bindings/iio/frequency/adi,adf41513.yaml`` for
complete device tree binding documentation.

**Basic configuration example**:

.. code-block:: dts

    adf41513@0 {
        compatible = "adi,adf41513";
        reg = <0>;
        spi-max-frequency = <10000000>;
        clocks = <&ref_clk>;
        avdd1-supply = <&vdd_3v3>;
        avdd2-supply = <&vdd_3v3>;
        avdd3-supply = <&vdd_3v3>;
        avdd4-supply = <&vdd_3v3>;
        avdd5-supply = <&vdd_3v3>;
        vp-supply = <&vdd_3v3>;

        adi,power-up-frequency = /bits/ 64 <12000000000>;
    };

6. Performance characteristics
==============================

6.1 Phase Noise Performance
----------------------------

The ADF41513 provides excellent phase noise performance:

**Integer-N mode**:

- Normalized phase noise floor: -235 dBc/Hz
- 1/f noise corner: Typically around 10 kHz offset
- Best performance mode for integer frequency multiples

**Fractional-N mode**:

- Normalized phase noise floor: -231 dBc/Hz
- Additional fractional spurs may be present
- Optimized with automatic bleed current and dithering

6.2 Frequency Ranges and Prescalers
------------------------------------

The driver automatically selects the appropriate prescaler based on frequency:

**4/5 Prescaler**:

- RF frequency range: 1 GHz to 16 GHz
- Integer-N: N = 20 to 511
- Fractional-N: N = 23 to 511

**8/9 Prescaler** (ADF41513 only):

- RF frequency range: 1 GHz to 26.5 GHz
- Integer-N: N = 64 to 1023
- Fractional-N: N = 75 to 1023

6.3 Reference Input Requirements
---------------------------------

- Frequency range: 10 MHz to 800 MHz
- Input sensitivity: -10 dBm to +8 dBm
- Slew rate requirement: >320 V/µs (>500 V/µs recommended)
- With doubler enabled: Maximum 225 MHz reference frequency

7. Usage examples
=================

7.1 Basic Frequency Setting
----------------------------

Set output frequency to 12.102 GHz:

.. code-block:: bash

    root:/sys/bus/iio/devices/iio:device0> echo 12102000000 > out_altvoltage0_frequency

Read current frequency:

.. code-block:: bash

    root:/sys/bus/iio/devices/iio:device0> cat out_altvoltage0_frequency
    12101999999.582767

7.2 High Resolution Frequency Control
-------------------------------------

Configure for sub-Hz resolution and set a precise frequency:

.. code-block:: bash

    # Set resolution to 0.1 Hz (100,000 µHz)
    root:/sys/bus/iio/devices/iio:device0> echo 0.1 > out_altvoltage0_frequency_resolution

    # Set frequency to 12.102 GHz (1 µHz precision)
    root:/sys/bus/iio/devices/iio:device0> echo 12102000000 > out_altvoltage0_frequency
    root:/sys/bus/iio/devices/iio:device0> cat out_altvoltage0_frequency
    12101999999.980131

7.3 Reference Frequency Control
-------------------------------

Change reference input frequency (if using programmable reference):

.. code-block:: bash

    # Set reference to 122.88 MHz
    root:/sys/bus/iio/devices/iio:device0> echo 122880000 > out_altvoltage0_refin_frequency

    # Verify the change
    root:/sys/bus/iio/devices/iio:device0> cat out_altvoltage0_refin_frequency
    122880000

7.4 Power Management
--------------------

Power down the device:

.. code-block:: bash

    root:/sys/bus/iio/devices/iio:device0> echo 1 > out_altvoltage0_powerdown

    # Power back up
    root:/sys/bus/iio/devices/iio:device0> echo 0 > out_altvoltage0_powerdown

7.5 PFD Frequency Monitoring
----------------------------

Read the current PFD frequency:

.. code-block:: bash

    root:/sys/bus/iio/devices/iio:device0> cat out_altvoltage0_pfd_frequency
    100000000.000000

This shows the PFD is operating at 100 MHz, which means the frequency resolution
in integer-N mode would be 100 MHz steps.

7.6 Lock Detect Count Configuration
------------------------------------

Query available lock detect count values:

.. code-block:: bash

    root:/sys/bus/iio/devices/iio:device0> cat out_altvoltage0_ld_count_available
    2 4 8 16 32 64 128 256 512 1024 2048 4096 8192

Set lock detect count to 256 for improved stability:

.. code-block:: bash

    root:/sys/bus/iio/devices/iio:device0> echo 256 > out_altvoltage0_ld_count

Read current lock detect count:

.. code-block:: bash

    root:/sys/bus/iio/devices/iio:device0> cat out_altvoltage0_ld_count
    256

7.7 Monitor Lock Status
-----------------------

When lock detect GPIO is configured, check if PLL is locked:

.. code-block:: bash

    # Read frequency - will return error if not locked
    root:/sys/bus/iio/devices/iio:device0> cat out_altvoltage0_frequency

If the PLL is not locked, the frequency read will return ``-EBUSY`` (Device or resource busy).

8. Advanced features
====================

8.1 Phase Resync
-----------------

Enabled when the device-tree property ``adi,phase-resync-period-ns`` is
non-zero, which sets the period of sync pulse, reponsible to trigger the phase
resync. The feature provides a consistent output phase relationship to the
reference input. This is particularly useful for beamforming applications where
phase coherence across multiple synthesizers is required.

8.2 Spurious Performance
------------------------

The driver includes automatic spur reduction techniques:

- **Integer boundary spur avoidance**: Automatic PFD frequency optimization
- **Fractional spur reduction**: Automatic dithering and bleed current
- **Reference spur suppression**: High PFD frequency operation when possible

9. Troubleshooting
==================

9.1 Common Issues
-----------------

**"PLL un-locked" errors**:

- Check reference input signal quality and level
- Verify loop filter design matches charge pump current
- Ensure VCO tuning range covers target frequency
- Check power supply voltage and stability

**Frequency accuracy issues**:

- Verify reference frequency accuracy
- Check frequency_resolution setting
- Ensure target frequency is within device range

**High spurious content**:

- Verify PCB layout follows ADI recommendations
- Check loop filter component values and quality
- Ensure adequate power supply decoupling
- Verify reference input signal purity
