.. imported from: https://wiki.analog.com/resources/tools-software/linux-drivers/net-phy/adin1100

.. _adin1100:

ADIN1100
========

ADIN1100 10BASE-T1L PHY Linux Driver.

Supported Devices
-----------------

- :adi:`ADIN1100`

Supported Boards
----------------

Description
-----------

The ADIN1100 is a low power single port 10BASE-T1L transceiver designed for
industrial Ethernet applications and is compliant with the IEEE 802.3cg Ethernet
standard for long reach 10 Mb/s Single Pair Ethernet. It integrates an Ethernet
PHY core with all the associated analog circuitry, input and output clock
buffering, the management interface control register and subsystem registers, as
well as the MAC interface and control logic to manage the reset and clock
control and pin configuration.

The PHY core supports the 1.0 V pk-pk operating mode and the 2.4 V pk-pk
operating mode defined in the standard and can operate from a single power
supply rail of 1.8V or 3.3V, with the lower voltage option supporting the 1.0 V
pk-pk transmit voltage level.

The 1.0 V pk-pk operating mode, external termination resistors and independent
Rx/Tx pins make the ADIN1100 suited to intrinsic safety applications.

The ADIN1100 has an integrated voltage supply monitoring circuit and power on
reset circuitry to improve system level robustness.

The MDIO interface is a two-wire serial interface for communication between a
host processor or MAC and the ADIN1100, thereby allowing access to control and
status information in the PHY core management registers. This interface is
compatible with both the IEEE 802.3 Standard Clause 22 and Clause 45 management
frame structures.

The ADIN1100 is available in a 6 mm × 6 mm 40-ld package.

Source Code
-----------

Status
~~~~~~

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Source
     - Mainlined?
     -
     -
   * - :git-linux:`drivers/net/phy/adin1100.c`
     - `In Progress <https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/tree/drivers/net/phy/adin-t1l.c>`__
     -
     -

Files
~~~~~

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Function
     - File
     -
   * - driver
     - :git-linux:`drivers/net/phy/adin1100.c`
     -

Example platform device initialization
--------------------------------------

The ADIN 10BASE-T1L PHY driver instantiates via Linux’s phylib framework, which
is typically enabled on most systems.

Depending on the MAC driver that is used and the operating mode (MII, RMII), a
device-tree entry for the PHY may or may-not be needed. The PHY can be
configured via HW pins
(:adi:`see datasheet <media/en/technical-documentation/data-sheets/ADIN1100.pdf>`).

**Optional properties (for MAC):**

- **phy-mode**: this is a standard Linux property for ethernet devices to select
  an operating mode for the PHY, it is typically configured in the MAC
  configuration, and the MAC uses it to configure the mode of the PHY. For the
  ADIN PHY, **accepted values** are: mii, rmii

::

   Example:

       ethernet-mac0 {
           #address-cells = <1>;
           #size-cells = <0>;

           phy-mode = "mii";

           ethernet-phy@0 {
               reg = <0>;
           };
       };

       ethernet-mac1 {
           #address-cells = <1>;
           #size-cells = <0>;

           phy-mode = "rmii";

           ethernet-phy@1 {
               reg = <1>;
           };
       };

Enabling Linux driver support
-----------------------------

Configure kernel with ``make menuconfig`` (alternatively use ``make xconfig`` or
``make qconfig``)

#. Hit the search button (typically the slash ``/`` key)
#. Type ADIN1100, then hit Enter; if nothing shows up, the driver is not
   available in your kernel tree, please use :git-linux:`/`
#. Press 1 (the key), then hit Enter
#. You should see the location + dependencies for enabling the driver

::

   Linux Kernel Configuration
   Symbol: ADIN1100_PHY [=y]
   Type  : tristate
   Prompt: Analog Devices Industrial Ethernet 10BASE-T1L PHYs
      Location:
        -> Device Drivers
          -> Network device support (NETDEVICES [=y])│
    (1)     -> PHY Device support and infrastructure (PHYLIB [=y])
      Defined at drivers/net/phy/Kconfig:208
      Depends on: NETDEVICES [=y] && PHYLIB [=y]

Driver testing
--------------

This requires that another 10BASE-T1L PHY be connected to the other end of the
network cable, or that a media converter be used to convert to normal
twisted-pair ethernet that standard ethernet cables use.

.. important::

   Depending on the userspace image that is being used, the network cards may
   [or may not get a DHCP address]. This is because there is a NetworkManager
   instance that handles this automatically.

   If NetworkManager isn’t running, it sometimes works to obtain a DHCP lease
   via **dhclient eth0** [or **eth1** or **eth2**, depending which MAC is
   attached to the ADIN 10BASE-T1L PHY].

ifconfig
~~~~~~~~

This tool will display the general status of the available network interfaces.
If they’ve obtained an IP address, RX packets/errors/dropped/etc, TX
packets/errors/dropped/etc, MAC address, etc.

Typically, if both TX & RX values are incremented, it means that it is working.
Also note that there are error counters; if only the TX/RX counters increment,
something may be wrong in the configuration between MAC & PHY, or sometimes at
the physical configuration (i.e. clocks not working, pins not connected
properly, etc).

::

   root@analog:~# ifconfig
   eth0      Link encap:Ethernet  HWaddr d6:41:50:ed:3b:65
             UP BROADCAST MULTICAST  MTU:1500  Metric:1
             RX packets:609895 errors:5 dropped:0 overruns:0 frame:0
             TX packets:286926 errors:0 dropped:0 overruns:0 carrier:0
             collisions:0 txqueuelen:1000
             RX bytes:0 (647.6 MB)  TX bytes:0 (38.7 MB)
             Interrupt:23

   eth1      Link encap:Ethernet  HWaddr 00:0a:35:03:73:d9
             UP BROADCAST MULTICAST  MTU:1500  Metric:1
             RX packets:0 errors:0 dropped:0 overruns:0 frame:0
             TX packets:0 errors:0 dropped:0 overruns:0 carrier:0
             collisions:0 txqueuelen:1000
             RX bytes:0 (0.0 B)  TX bytes:0 (0.0 B)
             Interrupt:24

   lo        Link encap:Local Loopback
             inet addr:127.0.0.1  Mask:255.0.0.0
             inet6 addr: ::1/128 Scope:Host
             UP LOOPBACK RUNNING  MTU:65536  Metric:1
             RX packets:8 errors:0 dropped:0 overruns:0 frame:0
             TX packets:8 errors:0 dropped:0 overruns:0 carrier:0
             collisions:0 txqueuelen:1000
             RX bytes:480 (480.0 B)  TX bytes:480 (480.0 B)

ethtool
~~~~~~~

This tool queries the MAC & PHY via the MAC driver. The MAC driver should also
allows access to the PHY registers.

.. important::

   If ethtool does not work, it should be resolved in the MAC driver. The MAC
   driver is not in the direct scope of Analog Devices support, since MACs are
   typically manufactured & supported by other companies

ethtool can be used to show & override link settings and other parameters for
the MAC & PHY.

Links for the tool:

- Official page with source code:
  https://mirrors.edge.kernel.org/pub/software/network/ethtool/
- Manual page: http://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man8/ethtool.8.html

.. tip::

   Some features of ethtool described here are available in newer versions of
   ethtool. If some of them don’t work, consider upgrading or getting a newer
   version

Example: Seeing MAC & PHY info
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

::

   root@analog:~# ethtool eth0
   Settings for eth0:
           Supported ports: [ TP MII ]
           Supported link modes:   10baseT/Full
           Supported pause frame use: No
           Supports auto-negotiation: Yes
           Supported FEC modes: Not reported
           Advertised link modes:  10baseT/Full
           Advertised pause frame use: No
           Advertised auto-negotiation: Yes
           Advertised FEC modes: Not reported
           Link partner advertised link modes:  10baseT/Full
           Link partner advertised pause frame use: Symmetric
           Link partner advertised auto-negotiation: Yes
           Link partner advertised FEC modes: Not reported
           Speed: 10Mb/s
           Duplex: Full
           Port: MII
           PHYAD: 0
           Transceiver: internal
           Auto-negotiation: on
           Link detected: yes

Example: changing link autonegotiation
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Since the PHY can only do 10 Mbps full-duplex, the only operation possible here
is to disable auto-negotiation and set preferred/forced master/slave

::

   ethtool -s eth0 speed 10 duplex full master-slave forced-master
   ethtool -s eth0 speed 10 duplex full master-slave forced-slave
   ethtool -s eth0 autoneg on
   ethtool -s eth0 autoneg on master-slave preferred-master
   ethtool -s eth0 autoneg on master-slave preferred-slave
   ethtool -s eth0 autoneg on master-slave forced-master
   ethtool -s eth0 autoneg on master-slave forced-slave

ADIN1100 cable test tool
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

ADIN1100 supports multiple cable diagnostics options. Some of them could not be
added in the driver as ethtool ops.

If you want control over those features from C code, add those files to your
project:

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Function
     - File
     -
   * - Header
     - `adin10spe_phy.h <http://github.com/analogdevicesinc/wiki-scripts/blob/adin1100-add-additional-dbg-tools/linux/drivers/adin1100/adin10spe_phy.h>`__
     -
   * - Code
     - `adin10spe_phy.c <http://github.com/analogdevicesinc/wiki-scripts/blob/adin1100-add-additional-dbg-tools/linux/drivers/adin1100/adin10spe_phy.c>`__
     -

Or you can compile the tool:

::

   root@analog:~/adin1100# cmake CMakeLists.txt
   -- The C compiler identification is GNU 8.3.0
   -- Check for working C compiler: /usr/bin/cc
   -- Check for working C compiler: /usr/bin/cc -- works
   -- Detecting C compiler ABI info
   -- Detecting C compiler ABI info - done
   -- Detecting C compile features
   -- Detecting C compile features - done
   -- Configuring done
   -- Generating done
   -- Build files have been written to: /root/adin1100
   root@analog:~/adin1100# make
   Scanning dependencies of target adin10spe_phy_tool
   [ 33%] Building C object CMakeFiles/adin10spe_phy_tool.dir/adin10spe_phy.c.o
   [ 66%] Building C object CMakeFiles/adin10spe_phy_tool.dir/adin10spe_phy_tool.c.o
   [100%] Linking C executable adin10spe_phy_tool
   [100%] Built target adin10spe_phy_tool
   root@analog:~/adin1100# ls
   CMakeCache.txt  CMakeFiles  CMakeLists.txt  Makefile  adin10spe_phy.c  adin10spe_phy.h  adin10spe_phy_tool  adin10spe_phy_tool.c  cmake_install.cmake
   root@analog:~/adin1100#

Check command line formatting via:

::

   root@analog:~/adin1100# ./adin10spe_phy_tool help
   ADIN10SPE_PHY cable diagnostics control tool:

   Usage: adin10spe_phy_tool [interface name] [phy ID] [start-fg | stop-fg | start-test | stop-test | start-lb | stop-lb] ...
   Example: adin10spe_phy_tool eth1 0 start-loopback pcs-loopback
   Features:
       Frame Generator:
           Usage: adin10spe_phy_tool [interface name] [phy ID] [start-fg | stop-fg] [frame-control] [frame-output-mode] [frame-length] [inter-frame-gap] [frames-number]
               frame-control:  random-payload zeros-payload ones-payload alternating-ones-payload decrementing-bytes-payload
               frame-output-mode:  continous-mode burst-mode

           Example 1: adin10spe_phy_tool eth1 0 start-fg ones-payload burst-mode 100 50 10
           Example 2: adin10spe_phy_tool eth1 0 stop-fg

       Test mode:
           Usage: adin10spe_phy_tool [interface name] [phy ID] [start-test | stop-test] [test-mode]
               test-mode:
                   test1: repeatedly transmits the data symbol sequence (+1, –1)
                   test2: transmits ten ``+1`` symbols followed by ten ``-1`` symbols
                   test3: transmits as in non-test operation and in the master data mode

           Example 1: adin10spe_phy_tool eth1 0 start-test test2
           Example 2: adin10spe_phy_tool eth1 0 stop-test

       Loopback:
           Usage: adin10spe_phy_tool [interface name] [phy ID] [start-lb | stop-lb] [lb-mode]
               lb-mode:  pma-loopback pcs-loopback mac-loopback

           Example 1: adin10spe_phy_tool eth1 0 start-lb pcs-loopback
           Example 2: adin10spe_phy_tool eth1 0 stop-lb

       Software power-down:
           Usage: adin10spe_phy_tool [interface name] [phy ID] software-power-down [True | False]

           Example : adin10spe_phy_tool eth1 0 software-power-down True
   root@analog:~/adin1100#

Throughput testing - iperf
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This is a more system-general test but it also validates the PHY.

.. tip::

   More tools are available for this sort of testing (iperf3, netperf, etc), but
   iperf is one of the more basic/simple ones to do this validation. If this one
   achieves expected results, others should too

On one of the endpoints with the ADIN1100, run:

::

   iperf -s

and on another system

::

   iperf -c <ip-addr-of-the-other-system>

Then reverse the commands on the hosts. iperf only works in one direction.

Data integrity testing
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

One one side, generate a file with random data (say 1GB)

::

   dd if=/dev/urandom of=test.data bs=1M count=1000

   sha256sum test.data
   <SHA256-hash-of-data>

Then transfer the data to the other side with scp,ftp,etc:

::

   scp test.data root@<ip-addr-of-the-other-host>

On the other host check the hash

::

   sha256sum test.data
   <SHA256-hash-of-data> == should be identical with the first hash

Ethernet pointers
-----------------

- netdev mailing list: netdev@vger.kernel.org
- `Ethernet Controller bindings doc <https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/tree/Documentation/devicetree/bindings/net/ethernet-controller.yaml>`__
- `Ethernet PHY bindings doc <https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/tree/Documentation/devicetree/bindings/net/ethernet-phy.yaml>`__

.. include:: /include/need-help.rst
   :start-after: .. start-need-help
   :end-before: .. end-need-help
