.. imported from: https://wiki.analog.com/resources/tools-software/linux-drivers/iio-pll/adf4371

.. _adf4371:

ADF4371
=======

ADF4371 IIO Wideband Synthesizer Linux Driver.

Supported Devices
-----------------

- :adi:`ADF4371`
- :adi:`ADF4372`

Supported Boards
----------------

| This driver supports the

- :adi:`EVAL-ADF4371`
- :adi:`EVAL-ADF4372`

Description
-----------

The ADF4371 allows implementation of fractional-N or Integer N phase-locked loop
(PLL) frequency synthesizers when used with an external loop filter and an
external reference frequency. The wideband microwave voltage controlled
oscillator (VCO) design allows frequencies from 62.5 MHz to 32 GHz to be
generated.

The ADF4371 has an integrated VCO with a fundamental output frequency ranging
from 4000 MHz to 8000 MHz. In addition, the VCO frequency is connected to divide
by 1, 2, 4, 8, 16, 32, or 64 circuits that allows the user to generate radio
frequency (RF) output frequencies as low as 62.5 MHz at RF8x. A frequency
multiplier at RF16x generates from 8 GHz to 16 GHz. A frequency quadrupler
generates frequencies from 16 GHz to 32 GHz at RF32x. RFAUX8x duplicates the
frequency range of RF8x or permits direct access to the VCO output. To suppress
the unwanted products of frequency multiplication, a harmonic filter exists
between the multipliers and the output stages of RF16x and RF32x.

Control of all on-chip registers is through a 3-wire interface. The ADF4371
operates with analog and digital power supplies ranging from 3.15 V to 3.45 V,
and 5 V for the VCO power supply. The ADF4371 also contains hardware and
software power-down modes.

Source Code
-----------

Status
~~~~~~

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Source
     - Mainlined?
     -
     -
   * - :git-linux:`drivers/iio/frequency/adf4371.c`
     - `YES <https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/tree/drivers/iio/frequency/adf4371.c>`__
     -
     -

Files
~~~~~

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Function
     - File
     -
   * - driver
     - :git-linux:`drivers/iio/frequency/adf4371.c`
     -
   * - Documentation
     - :git-linux:`adf4371.yaml <Documentation/devicetree/bindings/iio/frequency/adf4371.yaml>`
     -
   * - ABI documentation
     - :git-linux:`sysfs-bus-iio-frequency-adf4371 <Documentation/ABI/testing/sysfs-bus-iio-frequency-adf4371>`
     -

Example device tree

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Function
     - File
     -
   * - dts
     - :git-linux:`rpi-adf4371-overlay.dts <rpi-4.19.y:arch/arm/boot/dts/overlays/rpi-adf4371-overlay.dts>`
     -

Example platform device initialization
--------------------------------------

The ADF4371 driver is a SPI bus driver and can be instantiated via device tree.

**Required properties:**

- **compatible**: Should always be one of these:

  - ``adi,adf4371``
  - ``adi,adf4372``

- **reg**: SPI chip select number.
- **spi-max-frequency**: Max SPI frequency to use.
- **clocks**: a list of phandle, one for each entry in clock-names.
- **clock-names**: Must include the following entry: ``clkin``

**Optional properties:**

- **clock-scales**: The Common Clock Framework max rate is limited by MAX of
  unsigned long. For ADF4371/ADF4372 devices this is a deficiency. If specified,
  this property allows arbitrary scales. The first element in the array should
  be the multiplier and the second element should be the divider.
- **adi,mute-till-lock-en**: If this property is present, then the supply
  current to RF8P and RF8N output stage will shut down until the ADF4371/ADF4372
  achieves lock as measured by the digital lock detect circuitry.
- **adi,charge-pump-microamp**: Sets the charge pump current. If this property
  is not specified, then the charge pump current is set to the default 1750uA.
  The valid values are listed below. However, if the set value is not supported,
  the driver will look for the closest valid charge pump current. Valid values:
  350, 700, 1050, 1400, 1750, 2100, 2450, 2800, 3150, 3500, 3850, 4200, 4550,
  4900, 5250, 5600.
- **adi,loop-filter-inverting**: If this property is present, then the phase
  detector polarity will be set to negative because of the positive tuning of
  the VCO.

**Channel specific optional properties:**

- **reg**: The channel number. It can have up to 3 channels on adf4372 and 4
  channels on adf4371, numbered from 0 to 3.
- **adi,output-enable**: If this property is specified, the output channel will
  be enabled. If left empty, the driver will initialize the defaults (RF8x,
  channel 0 will be the only one enabled).
- **adi,power-up-frequency**: Set the frequency after power up for the channel.
  If this property is specified, it has to be in sync with the power up
  frequency set on the other channels. This limitation is due to the fact that
  all the channel frequencies are derived from the VCO fundamental frequency.

::

   Example:

   spi0 {
           #address-cells = <1>;
           #size-cells = <0>;
           frequency@0 {
                   compatible = "adi,adf4371";
                   reg = <0>;
                   #address-cells = <1>;
                   #size-cells = <0>;
                   #clock-cells = <1>;
                   spi-max-frequency = <1000000>;
                   clocks = <&adf4371_clkin>;
                   clock-names = "clkin";
                   clock-scales = <1 10>;
                   channel@0 {
                           reg = <0>;
                           adi,output-enable;
                           adi,power-up-frequency = /bits/ 64 <8000000000>;
                   };
                   channel@1 {
                           reg = <1>;
                           adi,output-enable;
                   };
                   channel@2 {
                           reg = <2>;
                           adi,output-enable;
                           adi,power-up-frequency = /bits/ 64 <16000000000>;
                   };
                   channel@3 {
                           reg = <3>;
                           adi,output-enable;
                           adi,power-up-frequency = /bits/ 64 <32000000000>;
                   };
           };
       };

Enabling Linux driver support
-----------------------------

Configure kernel with ``make menuconfig`` (alternatively use ``make xconfig`` or
``make qconfig``)

.. note::

   The ADF4371 driver depends on **SPI** and selects **REGMAP_SPI**

Adding Linux driver support
---------------------------

Configure kernel with ``make menuconfig`` (alternatively use ``make xconfig`` or
``make qconfig``)

::

   Linux Kernel Configuration
       Device Drivers  --->
       <*>     Industrial I/O support --->
           --- Industrial I/O support
                    Frequency Synthesizers DDS/PLL --->
                                *** Phase-Locked Loop (PLL) frequency synthesizers ***
                                <*> Analog Devices ADF4371/ADF4372 Wideband Synthesizers

Hardware configuration
----------------------

Driver testing
--------------

.. include:: /include/iio-snippets.rst
   :start-after: .. start-iio-device-files
   :end-before: .. end-iio-device-files

::

   analog:/sys/bus/iio/devices/iio:device0# cd /sys/bus/iio/devices/
   root@analog:/sys/bus/iio/devices# ls
   iio:device0  iio:device1  iio:device2  iio:device3
   root@analog:/sys/bus/iio/devices#

   root@analog:/sys/bus/iio/devices# cd iio\:device0
   root@analog:/sys/bus/iio/devices/iio:device0# ls -l
   total 0
   -r--r--r-- 1 root root 4096 sep  4 14:05 dev
   -rw-r--r-- 1 root root 4096 sep  4 14:05 muxout_enable
   -rw-r--r-- 1 root root 4096 sep  4 14:05 muxout_mode
   -r--r--r-- 1 root root 4096 sep  4 14:05 name
   lrwxrwxrwx 1 root root    0 sep  4 14:05 of_node -> ../../../../../../../../firmware/devicetree/base/soc/spi@7e204000/adf4371@0
   -rw-r--r-- 1 root root 4096 sep  4 14:05 out_altvoltage0_frequency
   -rw-r--r-- 1 root root 4096 sep  4 14:05 out_altvoltage0_name
   -rw-r--r-- 1 root root 4096 sep  4 14:05 out_altvoltage0_powerdown
   -rw-r--r-- 1 root root 4096 sep  4 14:05 out_altvoltage1_frequency
   -rw-r--r-- 1 root root 4096 sep  4 14:05 out_altvoltage1_name
   -rw-r--r-- 1 root root 4096 sep  4 14:05 out_altvoltage1_powerdown
   -rw-r--r-- 1 root root 4096 sep  4 14:05 out_altvoltage2_frequency
   -rw-r--r-- 1 root root 4096 sep  4 14:05 out_altvoltage2_name
   -rw-r--r-- 1 root root 4096 sep  4 14:05 out_altvoltage2_powerdown
   -rw-r--r-- 1 root root 4096 sep  4 14:05 out_altvoltage3_frequency
   -rw-r--r-- 1 root root 4096 sep  4 14:05 out_altvoltage3_name
   -rw-r--r-- 1 root root 4096 sep  4 14:05 out_altvoltage3_powerdown
   -r--r--r-- 1 root root 4096 sep  4 14:05 out_altvoltage_muxout_mode_available
   drwxr-xr-x 2 root root    0 sep  4 14:05 power
   lrwxrwxrwx 1 root root    0 sep  2 17:46 subsystem -> ../../../../../../../../bus/iio
   -rw-r--r-- 1 root root 4096 sep  2 17:46 uevent

   root@analog:/sys/bus/iio/devices/iio:device0#

Show device name
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

::

   root@analog:/sys/bus/iio/devices/iio:device0# cat name
   adf4371

Read channel frequency
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

::

   root@analog:/sys/bus/iio/devices/iio:device0# cat out_altvoltage0_frequency
   8000000000

Read channel name
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

::

   root@analog:/sys/bus/iio/devices/iio:device0# cat out_altvoltage0_name
   RF8x

Set channel frequency
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

::

   root@analog:/sys/bus/iio/devices/iio:device0# echo 1000000000 > out_altvoltage0_frequency
   root@analog:/sys/bus/iio/devices/iio:device0# cat out_altvoltage0_frequency
   1000000000

Channel power down
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

::

   root@analog:/sys/bus/iio/devices/iio:device0# cat out_altvoltage0_powerdown
   0
   root@analog:/sys/bus/iio/devices/iio:device0# echo 1 > out_altvoltage0_powerdown
   root@analog:/sys/bus/iio/devices/iio:device0# cat out_altvoltage0_powerdown
   1

Muxout mode
~~~~~~~~~~~

The mux output allows the user to access various internal points on the chip.
Valid values that can be written:

::

   root@analog:/sys/bus/iio/devices/iio:device0# cat out_altvoltage_muxout_mode_available
   tristate digital_lock charge_pump_up charge_pump_down RDIV2 N_div_out VCO_test high VCO_calib_R_band VCO_calib_N_band
   root@analog:/sys/bus/iio/devices/iio:device0# cat muxout_mode
   digital_lock
   root@analog:/sys/bus/iio/devices/iio:device0# echo charge_pump_up > muxout_mode
   root@analog:/sys/bus/iio/devices/iio:device0# cat muxout_mode
   charge_pump_up

More Information
----------------

.. include:: /include/iio-snippets.rst
   :start-after: .. start-iio-pointers
   :end-before: .. end-iio-pointers
