.. imported from: https://wiki.analog.com/resources/tools-software/linux-drivers/iio-pll/adrf6780

.. _adrf6780:

ADRF6780
========

ADRF6780 5.9 GHz to 23.6 GHz, Wideband, Microwave Upconverter Linux Driver.

Supported Devices
-----------------

- :adi:`ADRF6780`

Evaluation Boards
-----------------

- :adi:`EVAL-ADRF6780`

Description
-----------

This is a Linux industrial I/O (:external+documentation:ref:`iio`) subsystem
driver, targeting serial interface Microwave converters. The industrial I/O
subsystem provides a unified framework for drivers for many different types of
converters and sensors using a number of different physical interfaces (i2c,
spi, etc). See :external+documentation:ref:`iio` for more information.

Source Code
-----------

Status
~~~~~~

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Source
     - Mainlined?
     -
     -
   * - :git+linux:`git <main:drivers/iio/frequency/adrf6780.c>`
     - `WIP <https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/tree/drivers/iio/frequency/adrf6780.c>`__
     -
     -

Files
~~~~~

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Function
     - File
     -
   * - driver
     - :git+linux:`main:drivers/iio/frequency/adrf6780.c`
     -
   * - Documentation
     - `Documentation/ABI/testing/sysfs-bus-iio <https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/tree/Documentation/ABI/testing/sysfs-bus-iio>`__
     -

.. include:: /include/platform-and-bus-model.rst
   :start-after: .. start-declaring-spi-slave-devices
   :end-before: .. end-declaring-spi-slave-devices

properties
^^^^^^^^^^

**compatible:**

- enum:
- adi,adrf6780

**reg:**

- maxItems: 1

**spi-max-frequency:**

- minimum: 1000000

**clocks:**

- description: Definition of the external clock (see clock/clock-bindings.txt)
- minItems: 1

**clock-names:**

- description: Must be ``lo_in``
- maxItems: 1

**clock-output-names:**

- maxItems: 1

**adi,parity-en:**

- description: Enable Parity for Write execution.
- type: boolean

**adi,vga-buff-en:**

- description: VGA Buffer Enable.
- type: boolean

**adi,det-en:**

- description: Detector Enable.
- type: boolean

**adi,lo-buff-en:**

- description: LO Buffer Enable.
- type: boolean

**adi,if-mode-en:**

- description: IF Mode Enable.
- type: boolean

**adi,iq-mode-en:**

- description: IQ Mode Enable.
- type: boolean

**adi,lo-x2-en:**

- description: LO x2 Enable.
- type: boolean

**adi,lo-ppf-en:**

- description: LO x1 Enable.
- type: boolean

**adi,lo-en:**

- description: LO Enable.
- type: boolean

**adi,uc-bias-en:**

- description: UC Bias Enable.
- type: boolean

**adi,lo-sideband:**

- description: Switch to the Other LO Sideband.
- type: boolean

**adi,vdet-out-en:**

- description: VDET Output Select Enable.
- type: boolean

**‘#address-cells’:**

- const: 1

**‘#size-cells’:**

- const: 0

**‘#clock-cells’:**

- const: 0

**required:**

- compatible
- reg
- clocks
- clock-names

Example
^^^^^^^

.. code:: dts

   spi {
         spi {
         #address-cells = <1>;
         #size-cells = <0>;
         adrf6780@0{
           compatible = "adi,adrf6780";
           reg = <0>;
           spi-max-frequency = <1000000>;
           clocks = <&adrf6780_lo>;
           clock-names = "lo_in";
           adi,parity-en;
         };
       };

Adding Linux driver support
---------------------------

Configure kernel with ``make menuconfig`` (alternatively use ``make xconfig`` or
``make qconfig``)

.. note::

   The ADRF6780 Driver depends on **CONFIG_SPI**

::

   Linux Kernel Configuration
       Device Drivers  --->
           <*>     Industrial I/O support --->
               --- Industrial I/O support
                   Frequency  --->
                       <*> Analog Devices ADRF6780 Microwave Upconverter

Hardware configuration
----------------------

.. include:: /include/iio-snippets.rst
   :start-after: .. start-iio-device-files
   :end-before: .. end-iio-device-files

::

   root:/> cd /sys/bus/iio/devices/
   root:/sys/bus/iio/devices> ls
   iio:device0
   root:/sys/bus/iio/devices> iio:device0

   root:/> ls -l
   -r--r--r-- 1 root root 4096 May  6 12:20 dev
   -r--r--r-- 1 root root 4096 May  6 12:20 name
   -rw-r--r-- 1 root root 4096 May  6 13:01 out_voltage0_raw
   -rw-r--r-- 1 root root 4096 May  6 13:01 out_voltage0_scale
   -rw-r--r-- 1 root root 4096 May  6 13:01 out_altvoltage0_i_phase
   -rw-r--r-- 1 root root 4096 May  6 13:01 out_altvoltage0_q_phase
   lrwxrwxrwx 1 root root    0 May  6 12:20 subsystem -> ../../../../../../../../bus/iio
   -rw-r--r-- 1 root root 4096 May  6 12:20 uevent

Show device name
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

::

   root:/> cd /sys/bus/iio/devices/iio\:device0/
   root:/> cat name
   adrf6780

Set ChannelY Raw value
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

/sys/bus/iio/devices/iio:deviceX/out_voltageY_raw

ADC raw value. If shared across all channels, <type>_offset is used.

::

   root:/> cat out_voltage0_raw
   0

Set ChannelY Scale value
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

/sys/bus/iio/devices/iio:deviceX/out_voltageY_scale

RDAC Linearize. If shared across all channels, <type>_offset is used.

::

   root:/> cat out_voltage0_scale
   0

   root:/> echo 1 > out_voltage0_scale
   root:/> cat out_voltage0_scale
   1

Set ChannelY Phase value
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

/sys/bus/iio/devices/iio:deviceX/out_altvoltageY_Z_phase

Phase value. If shared across all channels, <type>_phase is used.

::

   root:/> cat out_altvoltage0_i_phase
   0

   root:/> echo 1 > out_altvoltage0_i_phase
   root:/> cat out_altvoltage0_phase
   1

More Information
----------------

.. include:: /include/iio-snippets.rst
   :start-after: .. start-iio-pointers
   :end-before: .. end-iio-pointers
