.. imported from: https://wiki.analog.com/resources/tools-software/linux-drivers/iio-pll/ltc6952

.. _ltc6952:

LTC6952
=======

LTC6952 Ultralow Jitter, 4.5GHz PLL, JESD204B/JESD204C Linux Driver.

Supported Devices
-----------------

- :adi:`LTC6952`
- :adi:`LTC6953`

Description
-----------

The :adi:`LTC6952` is a high performance, ultralow jitter, JESD204B/C
clock generation and distribution IC. It includes a Phase Locked Loop (PLL)
core, consisting of a reference divider, phase-frequency detector (PFD) with a
phase-lock indicator, ultralow noise charge pump and integer feedback divider.

The LTC6952’s eleven outputs can be configured is up to five JESD204B/C subclass
1 device clock/SYSREF pairs plus one general purpose output, or simply eleven
general purpose clock outputs for non-JESD204B/C applications.

This is a Linux industrial I/O (:external+documentation:ref:`iio`) subsystem
driver, targeting serial interface PLL Synthesizers. The industrial I/O
subsystem provides a unified framework for drivers for many different types of
converters and sensors using a number of different physical interfaces (i2c,
spi, etc). See :external+documentation:ref:`iio` for more information.

Source Code
-----------

Status
~~~~~~

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Source
     - Mainlined?
     -
   * - :git-linux:`drivers/iio/frequency/ltc6952.c`
     - No
     -

Files
~~~~~

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Function
     - File
     -
   * - driver
     - :git-linux:`drivers/iio/frequency/ltc6952.c`
     -
   * - Documentation
     - :git-linux:`Documentation/devicetree/bindings/iio/frequency/adi,ltc6952.yaml`
     -

Enabling the driver
-------------------

Configure kernel with ``make menuconfig`` (alternatively use ``make xconfig`` or
``make qconfig``)

.. note::

   The LTC6952 Driver depends on **CONFIG_SPI**

::

   Linux Kernel Configuration
       Device Drivers  --->
       <*>  Industrial I/O support --->
                Frequency Synthesizers DDS/PLL  --->
                    Clock Generator/Distribution  --->
                    <*> Analog Devices LTC6952 Clock Ultralow Jitter with JESD204B/C

Adding a device tree entry
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Available properties
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Required properties:
''''''''''''''''''''

- **compatible**: Should be ``adi,ltc6952``.
- **reg**: SPI chip select number.
- **spi-max-frequency**: Max SPI frequency to use (<= 20000000).
- **adi,vco-frequency-hz**: The frequency of the VCO.
- **adi,ref-frequency-hz**: Reference input frequency. This is fed in the
  reference divider.
- **clock-output-names**: An array of 11 elements, representing the names of the
  output clocks.

Adding channels
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Channels can be specified using child nodes. The following properties are
applicable to them:

- **reg**: The identifier of the channel.
- **adi,extended-name**: Descriptive channel name.
- **adi,divider**: Channel divider. This divides the incoming VCO frequency.
- **adi,digital-delay**: Each output divider can have the start time of the
  output delayed by integer multiples of half of the VCO period after a
  synchronization event.
- **adi,analog-delay**: Each output has a fine analog delay feature to further
  adjust its output delay time (tADELx) in small steps.

Device tree example
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The following example instantiates the LTC6962 driver for a LTC6962 device
connected on the SPI bus to the chip-select line 0.

::

   ltc6952@0 {
          compatible = "adi,ltc6952";
          reg = <0>;
          #address-cells = <1>;
          #size-cells = <0>;
          spi-max-frequency = <10000000>;
          clock-output-names = "ltc6952_out0", "ltc6952_out1", "ltc6952_out2",
            "ltc6952_out3", "ltc6952_out4", "ltc6952_out5", "ltc6952_out6",
            "ltc6952_out7", "ltc6952_out8", "ltc6952_out9", "ltc6952_out10";
          #clock-cells = <1>;
          adi,vco-frequency-hz = <4000000000>;
          adi,ref-frequency-hz = <100000000>;
          ltc6952_c0: channel@0 {
            reg = <0>;
            adi,extended-name = "REF_CLK";
            adi,divider = <10>;
            adi,digital-delay = <100>;
            adi,analog-delay = <0>;
          };
          ltc6952_c1: channel@1 {
            reg = <1>;
            adi,extended-name = "TEST_CLK";
            adi,divider = <10>;
          };
        };
